RFC 0018 - Improved Battery Status Reporting (#19)
mavlink/rfcs: text/001x-battery_improvements.md

By separating the cell voltage reporting into a separate message the new battery status can be much smaller, and the cell voltages need only be sent if the consumer is actually interested.

# Detailed Design

There are three parts to the design:
1. A more efficient status message
2. A scalable battery voltage message.
3. Mechanisms that allow the new messages to seamlessly coexist with the old one along with eventual deprecation of the older message.

## BATTERY_STATUS_V2

The message is heavily based on [BATTERY_STATUS](https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html#BATTERY_STATUS) but:
- removes the cell voltage arrays: `voltages` and `voltages_ext`
- adds `voltage`, the total cell voltage. This is a uint32_t to allow batteries with more than 65V.

```xml
    <message id="???" name="BATTERY_STATUS_V2">
      <description>Battery information. Updates GCS with flight controller battery status. Smart batteries also use this message, but may additionally send SMART_BATTERY_INFO.</description>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="id" instance="true">Battery ID</field>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="battery_function" enum="MAV_BATTERY_FUNCTION">Function of the battery</field>

>       <field type="uint8_t" name="type" enum="MAV_BATTERY_TYPE">Type (chemistry) of the battery</field>

Reviewer: since both `type` and `function` are provided in SMART_BATTERY_INFO and are non-essential I vote we drop them

Author: @dakejahl Originally we had battery-status with everything you needed for working with normal batteries (arguably you don't need type, but you do need function for multi-battery systems). Thus the separation was not just dynamic vs static, but "essential vs optional". 

I think that since we're breaking anyway, we should assume that if a GCS needs the information they WILL read the smart battery info. It's a simpler separation and results in smaller messages/less duplication. So I'll propose removing from V2. Let's see whether that gets through the RFC process.

Author: @dakejahl Done, but NOTE, there is a side effect. This means that we are essentially saying that the id field of a battery must always mean the _same_ battery function and chemistry - if you slot in a new battery there will be nothing to tell you that the chemistry has changed or that the battery has changed function. i.e. you would not know that you needed to re-read the SMART_BATTERY_INFO 

I'm not sure whether that matters/how much. If the id maps to a physical connector I would not expect the function to change. However the chemistry changing might matter. 

We might emit `SMART_BATTERY_INFO` on battery change or at very low rate to overcome this.

      <field type="int16_t" name="temperature" units="cdegC" invalid="INT16_MAX">Temperature of the battery. INT16_MAX for unknown temperature.</field>
      <field type="uint32_t" name="voltage" units="mV" invalid="[UINT32_MAX]">Battery voltage (total).</field>
      <field type="int16_t" name="current" units="cA" invalid="UINT16_MAX">Battery current (through all cells/loads). Positive if discharging, negative if charging. UINT16_MAX: field not provided.</field>
      <field type="int32_t" name="current_consumed" units="mAh" invalid="-1">Consumed charge, -1: Current consumption estimate not provided.</field>

>       <field type="int32_t" name="energy_consumed" units="hJ" invalid="-1">Consumed energy, -1: Energy consumption estimate not provided.</field>

Reviewer: mAh is pretty ubiquitous, does anyone actually care about joules? (honest question, I don't know)

Author: The feedback I've had agrees with you. I'll remove.

>       <field type="int8_t" name="battery_remaining" units="%" invalid="-1">Remaining battery energy. Values: [0-100], -1: Remaining battery energy is not provided.</field>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      <field type="int8_t" name="percent_remaining" units="%" invalid="-1">Remaining battery energy. Values: [0-100], -1: Remaining battery energy is not provided.</field>
```

      <field type="uint32_t" name="time_remaining" units="s" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Remaining battery time (estimated), UINT32_MAX: Remaining battery time estimate not provided.</field>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="charge_state" enum="MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE">State for extent of discharge, provided by autopilot for warning or external reactions</field>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="mode" enum="MAV_BATTERY_MODE">Battery mode. Default (0) is that battery mode reporting is not supported or battery is in normal-use mode.</field>

>       <field type="uint32_t" name="fault_bitmask" display="bitmask" enum="MAV_BATTERY_FAULT">Fault/health indications. These should be set when charge_state is MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE_FAILED or MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE_UNHEALTHY (if not, fault reporting is not supported).</field>

Reviewer: I feel like `charge_state`, `mode`, and `fault_bitmask` could be combined into a single `uint32_t status`... the concept of a "charge state" doesn't make a lot of sense. It's either charging, discharging, or idle. If it's not charging/discharging due to some error, that would be indicated using one of the other fault flags. Having separate enums to convey some "charge state" is effectively redundant, since it's just telling you to look at the fault flags to understand why the "charge state" is abnormal. 

I would argue the same about "mode". We can convey the entire operating state of the battery with a single uint32 set of bit flags.

Author: Seems @WickedShell shares your opinion: https://github.com/mavlink/rfcs/pull/19/files#r838110393

I think the charging state and faults could easily be combined, and that the charging state needs to be thought out a bit more. Whether or not we can do this depends on who has implemented the current message.

Reviewer: >though you might argue the charge states are logically separate

How? The battery is either between 0% and 100% or it is in fault. If it's in fault and can't charge, it would be indicated by a flag. For example if it was overdischarged, a cell is in fault, or temp is too high/low

Reviewer: >The one case you can't infer is MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE_CHARGING

If we reworked this to combine charge_state/mode/fault all under a single MAV_BATTERY_V2_STATUS_FLAGS and used the same flags as the DroneCAN PR I have open, we could represent all of the information we could possibly want. You could infer charging/discharging with the flags `STATUS_FLAG_IN_USE` and `STATUS_FLAG_CHARGING`

I also think many of the existing MAV_BATTERY_FAULT fields are useless. All of the "incompatible" fields don't make any sense, neither does the "voltage spikes" field. I know undoing things in mavlink can be hard, so that's why I am suggesting we might be better off using a new bitmask enum

    </message>
```

Questions:
- It is desirable to move static fields like the `type` (battery chemistry) and `battery_function` out of the new message because they only need to be read once, and afterwards are dead weight.
  For this to be OK, the information either has to be non-essential (i.e might never be provided) or guaranteed to be sent in another message (this info is present in [SMART_BATTERY_INFO](https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html#SMART_BATTERY_INFO)).

>   - Is it non-essential?

Reviewer: Yes I think it's non-essential

  - If it is essential, do we leave it in the message or mandate sending of `SMART_BATTERY_INFO`?
- Do we need all the other fields?
- Are there any other fields missing?

## Battery Voltages

The proposed battery message is below.

This assumes that the reason you might need the individual battery voltages is in order to identify that a particular cell has a significantly different voltage, and is hence in fault.
It simply sends information about which cells are in fault, providing battery manufacturers a way of reporting more detailed debugging information.

```xml
    <message id="???" name="BATTERY_VOLTAGE_FAULT">
      <description>Battery information. Updates GCS with flight controller battery status. Smart batteries also use this message, but may additionally send SMART_BATTERY_INFO.</description>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="id" instance="true">Battery ID</field>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="index">Cell index (0 by default). This is iterated for every 64 cells, allowing very large cell fault information. </field>
      <field type="uint64_t" name="fault_mask">Fault/health indications. .</field>

>     </message>

Reviewer: If this messages corresponds to a single cell, why don't we add an extra field for the cell voltage value itself?

Author: @dakejahl It corresponds to a single battery - so this gives you **fault** information on every cell in the battery. If there are more than 64 cells, you send it again with an increased cell index value.

Yes we could include the total battery voltage, but you get that in battery status. If you're sending fault information it isn't useful/and isn't actually relevant.

I've had feedback that this message is not suitable. The argument behind this design was that you are only interested in the cells that are in fault, and it would be the smart battery that told you. In other words that you do not need to know the actual voltages for the cells.

However I have since been told that when your cells start to go it is actually likely that a human will be the right person to work that out/analyse the data. So instead of sending faults we should send the raw cell data.
note however that you don't need it all the time - just when there is a problem. 
I will modify in line with that later today.

Author: Note, the message changed to `BATTERY_CELL_VOLTAGES`. The answer still applies, so I am closing this a resolved.

```

## Migration/Discovery

`BATTERY_STATUS` consumes significant bandwidth: sending `BATTERY_STATUS_V2` at the same time would just increase the problem.

[
What are options here?
- Add support for either format in QGC/Mission Planner etc.

> - Flight stack send `BATTERY_STATUS` but ground station can request BATTERY_STATUS_V2 and turn off BATTERY_STATUS_V2 using SET_INTERVAL?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Flight stack send `BATTERY_STATUS` but ground station can request BATTERY_STATUS_V2 and turn off BATTERY_STATUS using SET_INTERVAL?
```

    </message>
```

The message is heavily based on [BATTERY_STATUS](https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html#BATTERY_STATUS) but:
- removes the cell voltage arrays: `voltages` and `voltages_ext`
- adds `voltage`, the total cell voltage. This is a uint32_t to allow batteries with more than 65V.
- removes `energy_consumed`. This essentially duplicates `current_consumed` for most purposes, and `current_consumed`/mAh is nearly ubiquitous.
- removes `battery_function` and `type` (chemistry) as these are present in `SMART_BATTERY_INFO` and invariant.
  ```xml
     <field type="uint8_t" name="battery_function" enum="MAV_BATTERY_FUNCTION">Function of the battery</field>
     <field type="uint8_t" name="type" enum="MAV_BATTERY_TYPE">Type (chemistry) of the battery</field>
  ```
  - A GCS that needs invariant information should read `SMART_BATTERY_INFO` on startup
  - A vehicle that allows battery swapping must stream `SMART_BATTERY_INFO` (at low rate) to ensure that battery changes are notifie (and ideally also emit it on battery change).

#### Questions

- Do we need all the other fields?
- Are there any other fields missing?

> - `current_consumed`, `percent_remaining`, `time_remaining` all tell much the same story, and can be estimated from each other. Do we need all of these, and if so which ones?

Author: IMO most GCS 
- would _like_ to be able to show `time_remaining` but it's a pretty arbitrary value because it depends on load. 
- So instead they are likely to display `percent_remaining` as a simple, clearly understood, and somewhat reliable proxy for that. 
- `percent_remaining` can be inferred from the total charge and `current_consumed`, but do we really want to force simply systems like FPV to do so.

My leaning would be to keep all of them, but only if we think that the time remaining is both likely to be calculated by the batter and can better be calculated by the battery than the GCS. If the calculation can reasonably and better be pushed to the GCS then we should provide the information to allow that and remove the time remaining from this message.

Reviewer: BMS ASICs do provide a "time remaining" estimate but as you noted this is going to depend on load... so it's probably not a very useful value. I think if we wanted a time remaining estimate, this could be done GCS side pretty easily so my vote is we drop it

Reviewer: I replace `time_remaining` with `current_consumed`

Author: @dakejahl I removed `time_remaining`. It's a draft proposal though, so people might want it back in.

- Provide a cleaner message and design for both implementers and consumers.

The [BATTERY_STATUS](https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html#BATTERY_STATUS) has two arrays that can be used to report individual cell voltages (up to 14), or a single cumulative voltage, and which cannot be truncated.
The vast majority of consumers are only interested in the total battery voltage, and either sum the battery cells or get the cumulative voltage.
By separating the cell voltage reporting into a separate message the new battery status can be much smaller, and the cell voltages need only be sent if the consumer is actually interested.

# Detailed Design

There are three parts to the design:
1. A more efficient status message
2. A scalable battery voltage message.
3. Mechanisms that allow the new messages to seamlessly coexist with the old one along with eventual deprecation of the older message.

## BATTERY_STATUS_V2

The proposed message is:

```xml
    <message id="???" name="BATTERY_STATUS_V2">
      <description>Battery dynamic information. This should be streamed (nominally at 1Hz). Static battery information is sent in SMART_BATTERY_INFO.</description>

>       <field type="uint8_t" name="id" instance="true">Battery ID</field>

Author: Feedback @WickedShell
- voltage/current/consumed/ are needed at high rate.
- temperature could be low - would not mind
- Actually, mostly I'd be interested in a `POWER_STATUS` message that has just voltage + current and an ID. This would not be battery specific.
- The mode and hot swap enum stuff is odd and should be removed.
- For cell voltages, want to be able to log long term traces of all cells.

Reviewer: consumed and percent_remaining are essentially the same thing, do we need both? I agree with needing some way to view cell voltages. I think a separate message for cell voltages that can be enabled would be a good idea.

Author: @dakejahl 
1. Yes, separate message for cell voltages defined. Search on `BATTERY_CELL_VOLTAGES` below.
2.  > consumed and percent_remaining are essentially the same thing, do we need both?

   It might be worth having both - I will add this as a "question". Most recipients - e.g. a GCS or FPV will only be interested in displaying the `percent_remaining` (or perhaps "time remaining") but that is pretty low resolution. However you don't want to force very basic systems to have to calculate this.

Author: Marking as resolved.

  ```xml
     <field type="uint8_t" name="battery_function" enum="MAV_BATTERY_FUNCTION">Function of the battery</field>
     <field type="uint8_t" name="type" enum="MAV_BATTERY_TYPE">Type (chemistry) of the battery</field>
  ```
  - A GCS that needs invariant information should read `SMART_BATTERY_INFO` on startup
  - A vehicle that allows battery swapping must stream `SMART_BATTERY_INFO` (at low rate) to ensure that battery changes are notifie (and ideally also emit it on battery change).

#### Questions

- Do we need all the other fields?
- Are there any other fields missing?

## Battery Cell Voltages

The proposed battery message is:

```xml
    <message id="???" name="BATTERY_CELL_VOLTAGES">
      <description>Battery cell voltages.
        This message is provided primarily for cell fault debugging.
	For batteries with more than 10 cells the message should be sent multiple times, iterating the index value.
	It should not be streamed at very low rate (less than once a minute) or streamed only on request.</description>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="id" instance="true">Battery ID</field>

>       <field type="uint8_t" name="index">Cell index (0 by default). This can be iterated for batteries with more than 10 cells.</field>

Author: ```suggestion
      <field type="uint8_t" name="index">Cell index (0 by default). This can be iterated for batteries with more than 12 cells.</field>
```

>       <field type="uint16_t[10]" name="voltages" units="mV" invalid="[0]">Battery voltage of 10 cells at current index. Cells above the valid cell count for this battery should be set to 0.</field>

Author: Change to 12 - normal multiplier for batteries.

```suggestion
      <field type="uint16_t[12]" name="voltages" units="mV" invalid="[0]">Battery voltage of 10 cells at current index. Cells above the valid cell count for this battery should be set to 0.</field>
```

>       <field type="uint16_t[12]" name="voltages" units="mV" invalid="[0]">Battery voltage of 10 cells at current index. Cells above the valid cell count for this battery should be set to 0.</field>

Author: ```suggestion
      <field type="uint16_t[12]" name="voltages" units="mV" invalid="[0]">Battery voltage of 12 cells at current index. Cells above the valid cell count for this battery should be set to 0.</field>
```

    </message>
```

The message is heavily based on [BATTERY_STATUS](https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html#BATTERY_STATUS) but:
- removes the cell voltage arrays: `voltages` and `voltages_ext`
- adds `voltage`, the total cell voltage. This is a uint32_t to allow batteries with more than 65V.
- removes `energy_consumed`. This essentially duplicates `current_consumed` for most purposes, and `current_consumed`/mAh is nearly ubiquitous.
- removes `battery_function` and `type` (chemistry) as these are present in `SMART_BATTERY_INFO` and invariant.
  ```xml
     <field type="uint8_t" name="battery_function" enum="MAV_BATTERY_FUNCTION">Function of the battery</field>
     <field type="uint8_t" name="type" enum="MAV_BATTERY_TYPE">Type (chemistry) of the battery</field>
  ```
  - A GCS that needs invariant information should read `SMART_BATTERY_INFO` on startup
  - A vehicle that allows battery swapping must stream `SMART_BATTERY_INFO` (at low rate) to ensure that battery changes are notifie (and ideally also emit it on battery change).

#### Questions

- Do we need all the other fields?
- Are there any other fields missing?

> - `current_consumed`, `percent_remaining`, `time_remaining` all tell much the same the same story, and can be estimated from each other. Do we need all of these, and if so which ones?

Author: IMO most GCS 
- would _like_ to be able to show `time_remaining` but it's a pretty arbitrary value because it depends on load. 
- So instead they are likely to display `percent_remaining` as a simple, clearly understood, and somewhat reliable proxy for that. 
- `percent_remaining` can be inferred from the total charge and `current_consumed`, but do we really want to force simply systems like FPV to do so.

My leaning would be to keep all of them, but only if we think that the time remaining is both likely to be calculated by the batter and can better be calculated by the battery than the GCS. If the calculation can reasonably and better be pushed to the GCS then we should provide the information to allow that and remove the time remaining from this message.

1. A more efficient status message
2. A scalable battery voltage message.
3. Mechanisms that allow the new messages to seamlessly coexist with the old one along with eventual deprecation of the older message.

## BATTERY_STATUS_V2

The proposed message is:

```xml
    <message id="???" name="BATTERY_STATUS_V2">
      <description>Battery dynamic information. This should be streamed (nominally at 1Hz). Static battery information is sent in SMART_BATTERY_INFO.</description>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="id" instance="true">Battery ID</field>
      <field type="int16_t" name="temperature" units="cdegC" invalid="INT16_MAX">Temperature of the battery. INT16_MAX for unknown temperature.</field>
      <field type="uint32_t" name="voltage" units="mV" invalid="[UINT32_MAX]">Battery voltage (total).</field>
      <field type="int16_t" name="current" units="cA" invalid="UINT16_MAX">Battery current (through all cells/loads). Positive if discharging, negative if charging. UINT16_MAX: field not provided.</field>
      <field type="int32_t" name="current_consumed" units="mAh" invalid="-1">Consumed charge, -1: Current consumption estimate not provided.</field>

>       <field type="int8_t" name="percent_remaining" units="%" invalid="-1">Remaining battery energy. Values: [0-100], -1: Remaining battery energy is not provided.</field>

Author: Make a UINT8. Somewhat aligns with UAVCAN and also no need for negative values on %. Should clamp at zero if it thinks there is no power left.
```suggestion
      <field type="uint8_t" name="percent_remaining" units="%" invalid="UINT8_MAX">Remaining battery energy. Values: [0-100], UINT32_MAX: Remaining battery energy is not provided.</field>
```

      <field type="uint32_t" name="time_remaining" units="s" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Remaining battery time (estimated), UINT32_MAX: Remaining battery time estimate not provided.</field>
      <field type="uint32_t" name="fault_bitmask" display="bitmask" enum="MAV_BATTERY_FAULT">Fault/health/ready-to-use indications.</field>
    </message>
```

> With `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT` having the following **additions** (from `MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE` and `MAV_BATTERY_MODE`):

Reviewer: I made a comment above about it but my opinion is we start with a clean slate and define a new enum BATTERY_STATUS_V2_STATUS_FLAGS

> With `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT` having the following **additions** (from `MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE` and `MAV_BATTERY_MODE`):

Author: @dakejahl I'm happy to be lead by you, but can you provide your proposed set? I'm completely ignorant, so I'll be floating both the set and the dropped things past various experts. The think about enums though is that they are easy to add afterwards, so a smaller set is fine by me.

> With `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT` having the following **additions** (from `MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE` and `MAV_BATTERY_MODE`):

Reviewer: The set of flags in the DroneCAN PR are a good starting point. I am trying to think of any more we might want. The SAFETY_FAULT flag is used to indicate that one of the other fault conditions is a "safety fault", for BMS ASICs this would correspond to disabling the output FETs if protections are enabled (which is also indicated by a flag).
https://github.com/dronecan/DSDL/pull/7/files#diff-84419f8d2b61992ae9d50e2d09029c9cec37365ca16c6a29edae815177fc0c68R12-R26
```
uint16 STATUS_FLAG_IN_USE               = 1
uint16 STATUS_FLAG_CHARGING             = 2
uint16 STATUS_FLAG_OVER_TEMP            = 4
uint16 STATUS_FLAG_UNDER_TEMP           = 8
uint16 STATUS_FLAG_OVER_VOLT            = 16
uint16 STATUS_FLAG_UNDER_VOLT           = 32
uint16 STATUS_FLAG_OVER_CURRENT         = 64
uint16 STATUS_FLAG_SHORT_CIRCUIT        = 128
uint16 STATUS_FLAG_SAFETY_FAULT         = 256
uint16 STATUS_FLAG_CELL_IMBALANCE       = 512
uint16 STATUS_FLAG_CELL_BALANCING       = 1024
uint16 STATUS_FLAG_PROTECTIONS_ENABLED  = 2048
uint16 STATUS_FLAG_REQUIRES_SERVICE     = 4096
uint16 STATUS_FLAG_BAD_BATTERY          = 8192
uint16 STATUS_FLAG_ERROR_UNKNOWN        = 32768
```

> With `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT` having the following **additions** (from `MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE` and `MAV_BATTERY_MODE`):

Reviewer: Also I am going to bump from uint16 to uint32 to this can be further extended

> With `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT` having the following **additions** (from `MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE` and `MAV_BATTERY_MODE`):

Author: @dakejahl Thanks. So I'm more than happy to _propose_ starting again with `MAV_BATTERY_STATUS` (rather than `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT`) but we'll see how that goes. It makes sense to me because now it is a general status and not just a fault. 

In MAVLink adding enum values that "belong" is a zero cost thing to do. Is it the same in UAVCAN? If so, if there are any of these things that are speculative then we might be better off not including them? 

So, starting with the MAVLink set, below are the ones that don't have an obvious mapping between sets (to me). I need to justify the changes, most likely by saying they aren't needed because:
- won't ever be reported because can't be detected
- not useful
- don't make sense
- -can't be acted on etc.

These are battery faults - good/bad/ remove/keep/ why? If replace - why?

Value | Field Name | Description
--- | --- | ---
1 | MAV_BATTERY_FAULT_DEEP_DISCHARGE | Battery has deep discharged.
2 | MAV_BATTERY_FAULT_SPIKES | Voltage spikes.
4 | MAV_BATTERY_FAULT_CELL_FAIL | One or more cells have failed. 

These are "battery is not compatible" flags. I.e.  incompatibility driver detects that the battery shouldn't work properly even though the battery itself is behaving correctly. I think 64 and 256 might be variations on a theme.

Value | Field Name | Description
--- | --- | ---
64 | MAV_BATTERY_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_VOLTAGE | Vehicle voltage is not compatible with this battery (batteries on same power rail should have similar voltage).
128 | MAV_BATTERY_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_FIRMWARE | Battery firmware is not compatible with current autopilot firmware.
256 | MAV BATTERY_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_CELLS_CONFIGURATION | Battery is not compatible due to cell configuration (e.g. 5s1p when vehicle requires 6s).

These are states, like charging

Value | Field Name | Description
--- | --- | ---
1024 | BATTERY_FAULT_AUTO_DISCHARGING  | Battery is auto discharging (towards storage level). Not ready to use.
2056 | BATTERY_FAULT_HOT_SWAP | Battery in hot-swap mode (current limited to prevent spikes that might damage sensitive electrical circuits). Not ready to use.

Thoughts?

> With `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT` having the following **additions** (from `MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE` and `MAV_BATTERY_MODE`):

Author: Then, looking at the UAVCAN set, below are the ones without a direct mapping. I assume these are all things that might really occur and would be _useful to report_ (i.e. if it is a bad battery, presumably you might want to know it is bad due to a short circuit?). 

The missing thing for me is docs - I don't know much about batteries, so need explanation of what they do in order to know if this is clear. I've put comments/questions below for each. 

- uint32 STATUS_FLAG_IN_USE               = 1
  - This is just to indicate that the battery provides status reporting right? So this would always be set to 1 in most smart batteries?
- uint32 STATUS_FLAG_OVER_VOLT            = 16
  - Is this that the battery is higher voltage that spec (and if so what kind of voltage level would trigger this - 10%?)
  - Or is this battery voltage is higher rated than allowed on bus - e.g. equivalent to over-battery case for MAV_BATTERY_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_VOLTAGE
  - Is this a critical fault? I.e. would it also trigger STATUS_FLAG_SAFETY_FAULT and STATUS_FLAG_REQUIRES_SERVICE?
- uint32 STATUS_FLAG_UNDER_VOLT           = 32
  - As above?
- uint32 STATUS_FLAG_SHORT_CIRCUIT        = 128
  - What other flags does this set - i.e. STATUS_FLAG_REQUIRES_SERVICE, bad battery? Is it throw away or service, or don't fly. 
- uint32 STATUS_FLAG_SAFETY_FAULT         = 256 
  - Is this "dont' fly" or "potential issue"? 
  - Essentially, where does it sit compared to STATUS_FLAG_BAD_BATTERY, STATUS_FLAG_REQUIRES_SERVICE and STATUS_FLAG_BAD_BATTERY. My assumption is probably critical, but maybe you can service the battery or throw it away, depending on the actual fault.
- uint32 STATUS_FLAG_CELL_IMBALANCE       = 512
  - I think this means that the cells have different voltages - is that right? What does a user do in this case? Is it a safety issue?
- uint32 STATUS_FLAG_CELL_BALANCING       = 1024 
  - I assume this is some kind of state like "Charging"? Can the battery be used? What other things get triggered.
- uint32 STATUS_FLAG_PROTECTIONS_ENABLED  = 2048 
  - What does this mean?
- uint32 STATUS_FLAG_REQUIRES_SERVICE     = 4096
  - As above, can you fly with this? What other flags might be set?  
- uint32 STATUS_FLAG_BAD_BATTERY          = 8192
  - Does this mean throw away? What else triggers this? 
- uint32 STATUS_FLAG_ERROR_UNKNOWN        = 4294967295
  - I assume this is something a battery can use if it wants to report an error that isn't one of the above.?

> With `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT` having the following **additions** (from `MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE` and `MAV_BATTERY_MODE`):

Author: @dakejahl OK, for the "battery is not compatible" flags, I asked much the same questions. The answers are here: https://github.com/mavlink/mavlink/pull/1577#discussion_r572404514

@cmic0 We're making a common set of flags for batteries with UAVCAN (if at all possible). Can you please respond to the comments below about the incompatible firmware, voltage, and cell configuration. In summary "bad things will happen with the battery before software gets to tell you there is a problem".

>> MAV_BATTERY_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_FIRMWARE

>  remove, not useful. How is the autopilot software supposed to determine this?

>> MAV_BATTERY_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_VOLTAGE

> remove, something bad is going to happen electrically before software gets a chance to report this. In general if you plug the wrong voltage power supply into a device it's not going to work.

>> MAV_BATTERY_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_CELLS_CONFIGURATION 

> remove, same logic as the first one, if the voltage is wrong bad things will happen electrically

> With `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT` having the following **additions** (from `MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE` and `MAV_BATTERY_MODE`):

Reviewer 2: If i got the DroneCan flag correctly, `BATTERY_FAULT_HOT_SWAP` is actually the same as `STATUS_FLAG_PROTECTIONS_ENABLED`, hot swap was just another word to indicate that the battery protections to limit the current output are enabled, and defining them as "states" rather than "faults" clarifies things by a lot.

> MAV_BATTERY_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_FIRMWARE
In most of the implementations the driver on the autopilot side can have the knowledge about which minimum firmware version is required, when this flag is set means that the battery needs to be updated. I think this is a general condition worth to keep.

> MAV_BATTERY_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_VOLTAGE
In a multi-battery setup, you want to avoid that batteries with different charge levels are used for the flight. E.g if the delta between two batteries is > 2V the autopilot should flag it to the GCS.

> BATTERY_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_CELLS_CONFIGURATION
This flag is meant to catch the cases where the user tries to use a wrong battery on the vehicle (e.g a 5S instead of a 6S). In this circumstances the GCS should notify the user to correct the setup prior flying, does it make sense?

> With `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT` having the following **additions** (from `MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE` and `MAV_BATTERY_MODE`):

Reviewer: >In most of the implementations the driver on the autopilot side can have the knowledge about which minimum firmware version is required

For a battery with a "driver" this could be the case. For a uavcan battery this is not the case. 

>In a multi-battery setup, you want to avoid that batteries with different charge levels are used for the flight. E.g if the delta between two batteries is > 2V the autopilot should flag it to the GCS.

>This flag is meant to catch the cases where the user tries to use a wrong battery on the vehicle (e.g a 5S instead of a 6S). In this circumstances the GCS should notify the user to correct the setup prior flying, does it make sense?

If they are in series, sure you can indicate and maybe this is a good thing. If they are in parallel the higher voltage battery is going to sink current into the lower voltage battery and bad things will happen.

Since these are just flags I'm fine with leaving them in.

> With `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT` having the following **additions** (from `MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE` and `MAV_BATTERY_MODE`):

Reviewer: >In most of the implementations the driver on the autopilot side can have the knowledge about which minimum firmware version is required

For a battery with a "driver" this could be the case. For a uavcan battery this is not the case. 

>In a multi-battery setup, you want to avoid that batteries with different charge levels are used for the flight. E.g if the delta between two batteries is > 2V the autopilot should flag it to the GCS.

>This flag is meant to catch the cases where the user tries to use a wrong battery on the vehicle (e.g a 5S instead of a 6S). In this circumstances the GCS should notify the user to correct the setup prior flying, does it make sense?

If they are in series, sure you can indicate and maybe this is a good thing. If they are in parallel the higher voltage battery is going to sink current into the lower voltage battery and bad things will happen.

Since these are just flags I'm fine with leaving them in.

> With `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT` having the following **additions** (from `MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE` and `MAV_BATTERY_MODE`):

Author: > If i got the DroneCan flag correctly, BATTERY_FAULT_HOT_SWAP is actually the same as STATUS_FLAG_PROTECTIONS_ENABLED, 

@cmic0 They might be the same but there might be a subtle difference.

`STATUS_FLAG_PROTECTIONS_ENABLED` indicates that a safety system is _enabled_ but not necessarily "engaged". In other words, if this is true it is monitoring while supplying power as normal. IFF it detects a problem, e.g. a short circuit, it might trigger a STATUS_FLAG_PROTECTIONS_FAULT and turns off power flow.

Is that the same as BATTERY_FAULT_HOT_SWAP? (my read of your comment above might be that in HOT swap you have explicitly engaged that same state as `STATUS_FLAG_PROTECTIONS_FAULT` - i.e. no power, not that you are monitoring for issues. 

@dakejahl @cmic0 Irrespective of what "hot swap" does, is there a case for a state "like" STATUS_FLAG_PROTECTIONS_ENGAGED where you say I'm not monitoring and I don't have a fault, but things are risky so I want to turn off the outputs?

> With `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT` having the following **additions** (from `MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE` and `MAV_BATTERY_MODE`):

Author: For mavlink we can keep `BATTERY_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_CELLS_CONFIGURATION`. A system can't necessarily report this, but it is IMO fine to have status if it can be reported by some means. We should probably document that not all "faults" can be reported by all systems.

>> `BATTERY_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_CELLS_CONFIGURATION`
>>
> > This flag is meant to catch the cases where the user tries to use a wrong battery on the vehicle (e.g a 5S instead of a 6S). In this circumstances the GCS should notify the user to correct the setup prior flying, does it make sense?
> 
> If they are in series, sure you can indicate and maybe this is a good thing. If they are in parallel the higher voltage battery is going to sink current into the lower voltage battery and bad things will happen.
> 
> Since these are just flags I'm fine with leaving them in.

I'm fine with leaving it in, but I would like you @cmic0 to please clarify the parallel case. Because I suspect they might be in parallel, and I still wonder how this is useful. Or is it that the bad things are happening, and you think that there is still time to report the problem before it all falls over?

```xml
    <enum name="MAV_BATTERY_FAULT" bitmask="true">
      <description>Battery supply status flags (bitmask) indicating battery health and readiness for flight.</description>
      ...
      <entry value="512" name="BATTERY_FAULT_CHARGING">
        <description>Battery is charging. Not ready to use.</description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="1024" name="BATTERY_FAULT_AUTO_DISCHARGING">
        <description>Battery is auto discharging (towards storage level). Not ready to use.</description>
      </entry>

>       <entry value="1024" name="BATTERY_FAULT_HOT_SWAP">

Author: ```suggestion
      <entry value="2048" name="BATTERY_FAULT_HOT_SWAP">
```

## BATTERY_STATUS_V2

The proposed message is:

```xml
    <message id="???" name="BATTERY_STATUS_V2">
      <description>Battery dynamic information. This should be streamed (nominally at 1Hz). Static battery information is sent in SMART_BATTERY_INFO.</description>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="id" instance="true">Battery ID</field>
      <field type="int16_t" name="temperature" units="cdegC" invalid="INT16_MAX">Temperature of the battery. INT16_MAX for unknown temperature.</field>
      <field type="uint32_t" name="voltage" units="mV" invalid="[UINT32_MAX]">Battery voltage (total).</field>
      <field type="int16_t" name="current" units="cA" invalid="UINT16_MAX">Battery current (through all cells/loads). Positive if discharging, negative if charging. UINT16_MAX: field not provided.</field>
      <field type="int32_t" name="current_consumed" units="mAh" invalid="-1">Consumed charge, -1: Current consumption estimate not provided.</field>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="percent_remaining" units="%" invalid="UINT8_MAX">Remaining battery energy. Values: [0-100], UINT32_MAX: Remaining battery energy is not provided.</field>

>       <field type="uint32_t" name="fault_bitmask" display="bitmask" enum="MAV_BATTERY_FAULT">Fault/health/ready-to-use indications.</field>

Author: @dakejahl Below compares UAVCAN and MAVLink types as I believe they are now. 

MAVLink types are primarily designed around minimizing size of data sent. So we tend to use uints over floats where the required resolution can be provided in that way. Note that by "required" I mean available and useful resolution. We will output mA if that is what sensors provide and if that is useful for calculations needed by GCS. But if power modules only output cA and calculations we need to make don't care about mA resolution, then we wouldn't use a float to capture that information.

Why am I saying this? I'm hoping you'll look at the resolutions we get below and the values and say they are sufficient. If you think that, for example, we need more than .01A resolution and we might need more than 327.67 A then I might have to revisit the type. 

UAVCAN | MAVLink
--- | ---
NA | uint8_t id 
float16 temperature             # [C]         |  int16_t temperature [cdegC] (max 327.67)
float16 current                 # [Ampere]    | int16_t current [cA]  - (max 327.67 A)
float16 voltage                 # [Volt]      | uint32_t voltage [mV] - huge
uint32 current_consumed         # [mAh] 	# 0 if unknown | int32_t current_consumed mAh
uint8 percent_remaining         # [%] 		# 0 empty, 255 full | uint8_t percent_remaining [%] 0 to 100, 255 is not used.
uint32 status_flags | uint32_t fault_bitmask

The only specific thing I see above is that mavlink uses the 0-100 for the `percent_remaining` and 255 for "not used", while UAVCAN uses 0-255 for the percentage range.

I tend to like the way MAVLink does it unless a less than 1% resolution is actually useful. I am not sure it ever is.

Reviewer: Matching types between uavcan/mavlink seems less important since we can always cast. I think it's more important to ensure the type is large enough to hold the max/min value we might see now and in the future. That being said I'm not sure which type is better `int16` or `float16`. An `int16` is at least easier to do the math wrt to precision/range...

But an `int16` is probably too small to be future proof for centi-amp, so for the uavcan definitions I would prefer to use 32bit types for current and current_consumed.

@hendjoshsr71 made a good point about deriving amp-hours remaining from percent remaining and full charge capacity, more resolution is better. But we could still reserve 255 for unused if we wanted. 
https://github.com/dronecan/DSDL/pull/7#discussion_r836881886

Author: @dakejahl I've now responded to that comment  "about deriving amp-hours".
In summary it seems to me that its a good point that there is an issue, but whether you use an int8 or uint8 it is likely to still be a problem. 

Read the thread, but what I think UAVCAN should do is provide the right information to allow the remaining charge to be determine as accurately/usefully as possible. I was thinking perhaps  `charge_remaining` in mA hours. 
You would probably drop the percentage, and force a consumer that demands percentage remaining to calculate it - presumably using `100*charge_remaining/(charge_remaining+charge_consumed)`

I would propose MAVLink send `charge_remaining`. We might end up sending `battery_percentage` too to simplify things for consumers - but I wouldn't expect UAVCAN to necessarily do so since you won't be talking to OSDs/FPVs.

My logic here is that this is very like a car. Most drivers just want to be beeped when they are running low on power, but we all still appreciate the fuel gauge, which is generally just treated as a percentage that we intuitively map to how long before we'll have to fill up.

However some cars also estimate the amount of driving time you still have based on your fuel and estimated current consumption. Further, on a drone, you want to know the estimated power available so that you can do mission feasibility. 

No one does that very well in a car or drone, but we want to make it possible (hence the field). Do you think we provide enough if we also provide `charge_remaining`? My assumption is that the GCS should estimate the current consumption by integrating the current over time (reasonable?)

In summary, the message must support the future use case, and I don't think it sounds like `percentage_remaining` does that.

Does this make sense?

Author: W.r.t.  maximum current 327.67 A seems "large". I've asked @auturgy for feedback on whether it seems future proof, and best approach if it is not. For example, we might have this as a float or a uint_32, with units of mA rather than cA.

I'll add this as a "Question"

Reviewer: I agree I think including `charge_remaining` is a good idea. But it might also be a good idea to leave the % remaining too for the same reasons you pointed out about OSDs, as well as GCSs that don't request/get the SMART_BATTERY_INFO for whatever reason

Author: @dakejahl OK, I will add it to the proposal, and let's see what happens.

Author: @dakejahl FWIW it feels wasteful that we use int32 rather than uint32 for the memory as we're always wasting half that memory. Is 32767 mAh big enough/reasonable?

If not, tempted to make these uint32s just in case. Thoughts?

Reviewer 3: 32767 mAh is certainly not big enough.

Author: Thanks @hendjoshsr71 I will update. I think 4294967295 might be big enough :-)

@dakejahl I added `charge_remaining`. While thinking about it, it realize it is kind of essential. The theory behind the original battery designs is ancient - pretty much it is that you _always_ start with a full battery, you get the current consumed, and that gives you a fairly accurate battery remaining. The battery_percentage is in support of that.

But while it is always good to fly with full batteries every time I think it is silly to assume that everyone will. With this field if the battery knows it can always provide that information. If a battery sends this then we can know that the amount is not full to start with.

PS I work MAVLink/PX4 on Weds, Thurs. I drop in and out on other days if I have spare hours, but you can't rely on me. Apologies if I am slow to respond.

# Detailed Design

There are three parts to the design:
1. A more efficient status message
2. A scalable battery voltage message.
3. Mechanisms that allow the new messages to seamlessly coexist with the old one along with eventual deprecation of the older message.

## BATTERY_STATUS_V2

The proposed message is:

```xml
    <message id="???" name="BATTERY_STATUS_V2">
      <description>Battery dynamic information. This should be streamed (nominally at 1Hz). Static battery information is sent in SMART_BATTERY_INFO.</description>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="id" instance="true">Battery ID</field>
      <field type="int16_t" name="temperature" units="cdegC" invalid="INT16_MAX">Temperature of the battery. INT16_MAX field not provided.</field>
      <field type="uint32_t" name="voltage" units="mV" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Battery voltage (total). UINT32_MAX: field not provided.</field>
      <field type="uint32_t" name="current" units="mA" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Battery current (through all cells/loads). UINT32_MAX: field not provided.</field>

>       <field type="int32_t" name="current_consumed" units="mAh" invalid="-1">Consumed charge (estimate). -1: field not provided.</field>

Author: @dakejahl @hendjoshsr71 Just realised `current_consumed` and  "current_remaining" have a level of ambiguity.

In the past there was no way to measure the battery _remaining_ (is this still the case?). So was done is to mandate that batteries were filled for every flight, measure the power consumed using a power monitor, and estimate the remaining power by subtraction.

Do smart batteries do the same thing - the only difference from a power monitor being that the `current_consumed` is stored across reboots etc? 
Is the system clever enough to detect partial charges etc?

If so, I think probably we just need to be clear that if using a power monitor the current consumed and current remaining will be calculated on the assumption of a fully charged battery is used on every vehicle reboot.

Does that make sense?

Reviewer: >In the past there was no way to measure the battery remaining (is this still the case?)

Smart batteries absolutely know the remaining capacity in mAh

>If so, I think probably we just need to be clear that if using a power monitor the current consumed and current remaining will be calculated on the assumption of a fully charged battery is used on every vehicle reboot.

Yeah this is how Ardupilot does it, and it can be very misleading and cause a lot of problems for operators who plug in a less than full battery. With a dumb power monitor I would say don't even report the capacity_remaining, since this can give the operator a false sense that they have more remaining than they actually do. But that's just a general problem with dumb batteries... so yes we should leave some hints in the description about how to properly use the fields.

Reviewer 3: Yup. But there isn't really a better way that I know to do it that is truly any safer for a dumb battery?  If there is I would like to know? It looks like PX4 makes the same assumption? 

Because resting voltage lookup only works if the battery is rested..... and you have a table for the battery type right (not just the overall chemistry type)?

Author: I have no idea. But this is what the millions of power modules out there do now. So I don't think we can avoid catering for it.

        Power monitors do not normally send the `current_remaining` field as it can only be accurate if the battery is fully charged when the drone is turned on.
        (A GCS can use `current_remaining` being invalid as a trigger to notify the user to fully charge the battery before flight).
      </description>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="id" instance="true">Battery ID</field>
      <field type="int16_t" name="temperature" units="cdegC" invalid="INT16_MAX">Temperature of the whole battery pack (not internal electronics). INT16_MAX field not provided.</field>
      <field type="uint32_t" name="voltage" units="mV" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Battery voltage (total). UINT32_MAX: field not provided.</field>
      <field type="uint32_t" name="current" units="mA" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Battery current (through all cells/loads). UINT32_MAX: field not provided.</field>
      <field type="uint32_t" name="current_consumed" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Consumed charge (since vehicle powered on). UINT32_MAX: field not provided. Note: For power modules the expectation is that batteries are fully charged before turning on the vehicle.</field>

>       <field type="uint32_t" name="current_remaining" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Remaining charge (until empty). UINT32_MAX: field not provided. Note: Power monitors should not set this value.</field>

Reviewer: @hamishwillee Something similar to the idea was brought up by @hendjoshsr71 for the new DroneCAN messages. It's 4 bytes tho so for something so simple a status flag might make more sense. Idk though how tight we want it to be, we did just add another 4 bytes for 2 additional temperatures. 
https://github.com/dronecan/DSDL/pull/7/commits/2e2f070c4d131d8ae1fae7155a021544c89c4203#diff-06d183633540443cc294a31d649e99bcbe708700160dbb421e0c6204dfadbf9bR9-R10

And I am looking at it now and thinking we really don't need `capacity_remaining` since we would know full and consumed, as long as we redefined consumed to mean total consumed for the pack. This would be coloumb counting with an analog power monitor (consumed since boot) and it would be the fuel gauge for smart batteries (consumed since full)
https://github.com/dronecan/DSDL/pull/7/files#diff-a276641f2405349cc2307f345b18ec6e35498c405f3849842f22840603a90a4aR11

>       <field type="uint32_t" name="current_remaining" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Remaining charge (until empty). UINT32_MAX: field not provided. Note: Power monitors should not set this value.</field>

Author: Thanks @dakejahl :-). I commented on the post in dronecan: https://github.com/dronecan/DSDL/pull/7#issuecomment-1144239330

The summary is for MAVLink I think we really need to have capacity remaining. 

But what should the status bit be? I lean towards something that tells us what the measurements are relative to:

- MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL : If set , `current_consumed` and `current_remaining` are relative to battery full. If unset, `current_consumed` is relative to drone power-on, and `current_remaining` is an estimate based on the _assumption_ that battery was full on power on. This bit should be set by smart batteries and unset for power modules. If unset a GCS should always advise users to charge the battery on power on.

>       <field type="uint32_t" name="current_remaining" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Remaining charge (until empty). UINT32_MAX: field not provided. Note: Power monitors should not set this value.</field>

Reviewer: I'm cool with it, that works! But if we always provide both `consumed` and `remaining` then maybe we don't need `percent_remaining`

>       <field type="uint32_t" name="current_remaining" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Remaining charge (until empty). UINT32_MAX: field not provided. Note: Power monitors should not set this value.</field>

Reviewer: also this is nitpicky but I think we should call it `capacity_consumed` and `capacity_remaining` since mAh are units of capacity

>       <field type="uint32_t" name="current_remaining" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Remaining charge (until empty). UINT32_MAX: field not provided. Note: Power monitors should not set this value.</field>

Author: Hurray. We're crossing over chats a bit :-)

> also this is nitpicky but I think we should call it capacity_consumed and capacity_remaining since mAh are units of capacity

I like nitpicky :-). As long as it is before implementation. I will rename both of those as you have indicated.

> I'm cool with it, that works! But if we always provide both consumed and remaining then maybe we don't need percent_remaining

MAVLink  allows for systems that don't provide one or the other of these values, and I'd like to avoid the case where someone can't supply this because that will give them a divide by zero error (even though the battery is ready to provide a guess). Perhaps I'm over thinking this and absolutely all values should be optional.

UAVCAN does not have to provide it though if it can always provide the others.. I'll make the changes.

>       <field type="uint32_t" name="current_remaining" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Remaining charge (until empty). UINT32_MAX: field not provided. Note: Power monitors should not set this value.</field>

Reviewer: >PS @dakejahl Do you think it worth separating the status and the fault numbers a bit to allow us to group the faults and insert new items of the various types later if we need to?

Yup I was actually thinking that might be a good idea. First 16 bits for flags, last 16 for faults?

>       <field type="uint32_t" name="current_remaining" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Remaining charge (until empty). UINT32_MAX: field not provided. Note: Power monitors should not set this value.</field>

Reviewer: Or even break it into 2 uint16_t fields and reduce the text length for each enum string?

>       <field type="uint32_t" name="current_remaining" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Remaining charge (until empty). UINT32_MAX: field not provided. Note: Power monitors should not set this value.</field>

Author: The fact that you are talking about byte separation or separate fields tells me that maybe you are thinking of separating them "physically" for easier handling of the different types? I was thinking of grouping but not separating them - putting space around each category so they appear together in lists - not actually handling them differently

In the previous message we did have them separately as faults and modes. We merged them to one status because many of the things we had previously were not really either category. The MAVLink benefit of this is that we have one big field that is going to take a while to fill up (if ever). If we split them either logically in the same field or in separate fields we've got a smaller limit on growth in one or the other category.

Looking at this again, I'm not sure that we would want to separate them because almost everything we have now is actually a fault or should be treated like one - e.g. even "charging" is essentially a fault around using the battery to fly.
The only ones that are actually exceptions to this are MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL and 
MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_READY_TO_USE - this is inferred from absence of faults.

So I'd be tempted to move MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_READY_TO_USE and MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL literally to the end - 1 and backfill any future things that are really about usage.

Does that makes sense?

>       <field type="uint32_t" name="current_remaining" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Remaining charge (until empty). UINT32_MAX: field not provided. Note: Power monitors should not set this value.</field>

Author: Done!

        Static/invariant battery information is sent in SMART_BATTERY_INFO.

        The full-battery charge is current_remaining + current_consumed, iff both values are supplied.
        The `current_remaining` field should only be sent if it is guaranteed to be near-accurate.
        Power monitors typically should not send the `current_remaining` field as it can only be accurate if the battery is fully charged when the drone is turned on.
        (A GCS can use `current_remaining` being invalid as a trigger to notify the user to fully charge the battery before flight).
      </description>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="id" instance="true">Battery ID</field>
      <field type="int16_t" name="temperature" units="cdegC" invalid="INT16_MAX">Temperature of the whole battery pack (not internal electronics). INT16_MAX field not provided.</field>
      <field type="uint32_t" name="voltage" units="mV" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Battery voltage (total). UINT32_MAX: field not provided.</field>
      <field type="uint32_t" name="current" units="mA" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Battery current (through all cells/loads). UINT32_MAX: field not provided.</field>

>       <field type="uint32_t" name="current_consumed" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Consumed charge (from full). UINT32_MAX: field not provided. Note: Power modules report the current consumed since they were last turned on (the expectation is that batteries are fully charged before turning on the vehicle).</field>

Reviewer: I'm not sure we need to specify "from full", I would say in almost all cases it's since it was turned on. The current_remaining field tells us the exact amount remaining and using current_remaining / percent_remaining we can derive the full charge capacity.

Author: Ah. I thought _you_ said that smart batteries report consumed "from full". What you are suggesting is much better because it is consistent for both batteries and power monitors. I'll update.

      <field type="uint32_t" name="current_remaining" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Remaining charge (until empty). UINT32_MAX: field not provided. Note: Power monitors should not set this value.</field>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="percent_remaining" units="%" invalid="UINT8_MAX">Remaining battery energy. Values: [0-100], UINT32_MAX: field not provided.</field>

>       <field type="uint32_t" name="battery_status" display="bitmask" enum="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS">Fault, health, and readiness status indications.</field>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      <field type="uint32_t" name="status_flags" display="bitmask" enum="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS">Fault, health, and readiness status indications.</field>
```

    </message>
```

> `MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS` is a new enum that includes faults, charge state, and battery mode:

Author: @dakejahl [Following our very long conversations on battery status flags](https://github.com/mavlink/rfcs/pull/19#issuecomment-1091085450) this is what I think we (more or less) agreed. Note that I have not attempted to match the numbers/ids yet since I might not have it right. Can you please look at this and confirm you think I have it right. If so, I think I can make this "not draft" and start getting broader feedback.

A few notes:
- Removed `STATUS_FLAG_IN_USE` - don't see a need for it now. We can add later if that changes.
- Removed `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT_DEEP_DISCHARGE` as discussed (can be inferred from other flags)
- Kept MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_CELL_FAIL - I think it is useful to report that we know cells have died but it is still safe to fly on this battery. If you can never have a cell fail and still consider the battery safe to use then we should remove (?)
- Kept BAD_BATTERY as discussed.
- The fault for a protection system trigger is called MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_PROTECTION_SYSTEM
  - FAULT is in name before the type of fault - e.g.  STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_PROTECTION_SYSTEM - not sure if would be better having fault at end (so ...STATUS_FLAGS_PROTECTION_SYSTEM_FAULT).
- I assume that faults like over voltage might trigger even if the safety fault does not (i.e. you still get the warning).

It wasn't clear to me if we need status "there isn't a fault but we turned on the protection system anyway". Maybe that is just the STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_PROTECTION_SYSTEM

Author: @dakejahl My inclination was to leave `MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_CELL_FAIL` - if you got this and bad battery you would then know the cause of the issue. But we can always add it back later if there is a general feeling it is needed (so I will removed).

PROTECTION discussed in the other comment you mande

```xml
    <enum name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS" bitmask="true">
      <description>Battery status flags for fault, health and state indication.</description>
      <entry value="1" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_READY_TO_USE">
        <description>
          The battery is ready to use (fly).
          Only set if the battery is safe and ready to fly with (not charging, no critical faults, such as those that would set MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_REQUIRES_SERVICE or MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_BAD_BATTERY, etc.).
        </description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="2" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CHARGING">
        <description>
          Battery is charging.
          Not ready to use (MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_READY_TO_USE would not be set).
        </description>
      </entry>

>       <entry value="4" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_CELL_BALANCING">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      <entry value="4" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CELL_BALANCING">
```
balancing is not a fault so we shouldn't call it one?

          It is likely to be set for most faults, and may also be set according to a maintenance schedule (such as age, or number of recharge cycles, etc.).
        </description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="64" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_BAD_BATTERY">
        <description>
          Battery is faulty and cannot be repaired (not safe to fly). 
          This is set at vendor discretion.
          The battery should be disposed of safely.
        </description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="128" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_PROTECTIONS_ENABLED">
        <description>
          Automatic battery protection monitoring is enabled. 
          When enabled, the system will monitor for certain kinds of faults, such as cells being over-voltage.
          If a fault is triggered then and protections are enabled then a safety fault (MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_PROTECTION_SYSTEM) will be set and power from the battery will be stopped.
          Note that the associated fault (such as MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_OVER_VOLT) should always be set whether or not the protection system is engaged.
        </description>
      </entry>

>       <entry value="256" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_PROTECTION_SYSTEM">

Reviewer: oh you can ignore my other reply, I didn't realize this was a new flag separate from MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_PROTECTIONS_ENABLED

Author: @dakejahl Just to be very clear, there are two ways this might work. I think your system does the first one, but the second seems a little more flexible. 

Currently the RFC says:
- MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_PROTECTIONS_ENABLED - actively monitoring for some fault. Turn off if we get one.
- MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_PROTECTION_SYSTEM - the fault protections triggered because we got a fault. 

But (with slightly modified names) it could be:
- MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_PROTECTIONS_ENABLED - actively monitoring for some fault. Engage if we get a fault OR if we turn choose to engage the protections.
- MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_PROTECTION_ENGAGED - the fault protections are engaged so there is no power. You would get this if you are enabled and there is a fault, OR if you decided you just wanted to engage the protections.

So what's the difference?
- The first case implies that you only turn off for a fault, while the second implies you can explicitly turn on the protections (turn off power). If you got not other faults going high, you would assume this was just engaged deliberately.

Does what I am saying make sense? If so, do you agree the second set of names are better?

Author: Ping @dakejahl 
FYI, moving this out of draft for wider discussion. Would like to confirm the above.

Reviewer: >Does what I am saying make sense? If so, do you agree the second set of names are better?

I think the first names are better. The reason being is that the fault protection system is just an automatic way to turn off the output FETs. The key thing is it's an automatic action.The output FETs could be turned off manually if you wanted, and that could be reflected in the (now removed) ACTIVE flag. I'm not sure if a flag indicating that the output FETs are enabled/disabled is very useful, but that was the original reason behind the ACTIVE flag.

        </description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="512" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_OVER_VOLT">
        <description>One or more cells are above their maximum voltage rating.</description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="1024" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_UNDER_VOLT">
        <description>
          One or more cells are below their minimum voltage rating.
          A battery that had deep-discharged might be irrepairably damaged, and set both MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_UNDER_VOLT and MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_BAD_BATTERY.
        </description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="2048" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_OVER_TEMPERATURE">
        <description>Over-temperature fault.</description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="4096" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_UNDER_TEMPERATURE">
        <description>Under-temperature fault.</description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="8192" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_OVER_CURRENT">
        <description>Over-current fault.</description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="16384" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_CELL_FAIL">

>         <description>One or more cells have failed. The battery (or may not) may still be safe to fly.</description>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        <description>One or more cells have failed. The battery may or may not be safe to use (check other flags).</description>
```

      </entry>    
      <entry value="32768" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_SHORT_CIRCUIT">
        <description>
          Short circuit event detected.

>           The battery (or may not) may still be safe to use (check other flags).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          The battery may or may not be safe to use (check other flags).
```

        </description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="65536" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_VOLTAGE">

>         <description>Voltage not compatible power rail voltage (batteries on same power rail should have similar voltage).</description>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        <description>Voltage not compatible with power rail voltage (batteries on same power rail should have similar voltage).</description>
```

  * Start date: 2022-03-26
  * Contributors: Hamish Willee <hamishwillee@gmail.com>, ...
  * Related issues: 
    - [16-cell support #1747](https://github.com/mavlink/mavlink/pull/1747)
	- [common: added voltage and current multipliers to BATTERY_STATUS #233](https://github.com/ArduPilot/mavlink/pull/233)
    - [Add MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE_CHARGING #1068](https://github.com/mavlink/mavlink/pull/1068)
    - dronecan / DSDL : [WIP smart battery messages](https://github.com/dronecan/DSDL/pull/7) 

> 

Reviewer 2: @hamishwillee another valid document to consider for this RFC is the DS-013 standard 
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1xYBhhgjND_RS2W3Hq0Seyc-R661ge3zonk9DTIyHclc/edit

Author: ```suggestion
- [DS-013 Pixhawk Smart Battery Standard](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1xYBhhgjND_RS2W3Hq0Seyc-R661ge3zonk9DTIyHclc/edit) v0.4.0

```

Reviewer 3: I'd say the value of the extra temperatures vs. the link cost considering mavlink's main use is wireless isn't worth it. (Unlike in CAN)

But they do have a lot of value for higher end systems or those needing to fly in cold environments keeping track of how well their heater is coping.

## BATTERY_STATUS_V2

The proposed message is:

```xml
    <message id="369" name="BATTERY_STATUS_V2">
      <description>Battery dynamic information.
        This should be streamed (nominally at 1Hz).
        Static/invariant battery information is sent in SMART_BATTERY_INFO.
        Note that smart batteries should set the MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL bit to indicate that supplied capacity values are relative to a battery that is known to be full.
        Power monitors would not set this bit, indicating that capacity_consumed is relative to drone power-on, and that other values are estimated based on the assumption that the battery was full on power-on.
      </description>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="id" instance="true">Battery ID</field>
      <field type="int16_t" name="temperature" units="cdegC" invalid="INT16_MAX">Temperature of the whole battery pack (not internal electronics). INT16_MAX field not provided.</field>
      <field type="uint32_t" name="voltage" units="mV" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Battery voltage (total). UINT32_MAX: field not provided.</field>

>       <field type="uint32_t" name="current" units="mA" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Battery current (through all cells/loads). UINT32_MAX: field not provided.</field>

Author: ```suggestion
      <field type="int32_t" name="current" units="mA" invalid="INT32_MAX">Battery current (through all cells/loads). Positive value when discharging and negative if charging. INT32_MAX: field not provided.</field>
```

  * Start date: 2022-03-26
  * Contributors: Hamish Willee <hamishwillee@gmail.com>, ...
  * Related issues: 
    - [16-cell support #1747](https://github.com/mavlink/mavlink/pull/1747)
	- [common: added voltage and current multipliers to BATTERY_STATUS #233](https://github.com/ArduPilot/mavlink/pull/233)
    - [Add MAV_BATTERY_CHARGE_STATE_CHARGING #1068](https://github.com/mavlink/mavlink/pull/1068)
    - dronecan / DSDL : [WIP smart battery messages](https://github.com/dronecan/DSDL/pull/7) 
    - [DS-013 Pixhawk Smart Battery Standard](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1xYBhhgjND_RS2W3Hq0Seyc-R661ge3zonk9DTIyHclc/edit) v0.4.0

> 

Author: ```suggestion
    - [Common: rename SMART_BATTERY_INFO to BATTERY_INFO and add SOH](https://github.com/mavlink/mavlink/pull/2070)

```

- Align with DroneCan battery messages to ease transport and data conversion across different transports.

The [BATTERY_STATUS](https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html#BATTERY_STATUS) has two arrays that can be used to report individual cell voltages (up to 14), or a single cumulative voltage, and which cannot be truncated.
The vast majority of consumers are only interested in the total battery voltage, and either sum the battery cells or get the cumulative voltage.
By separating the cell voltage reporting into a separate message the new battery status can be much smaller, and the cell voltages need only be sent if the consumer is actually interested.

# Detailed Design

There are three parts to the design:
1. A more efficient status message
2. A scalable battery voltage message.
3. Mechanisms that allow the new messages to seamlessly coexist with the old one along with eventual deprecation of the older message.

## BATTERY_STATUS_V2

The proposed message is:

```xml
    <message id="369" name="BATTERY_STATUS_V2">
      <description>Battery dynamic information.
        This should be streamed (nominally at 1Hz).

>         Static/invariant battery information is sent in SMART_BATTERY_INFO.

Author: ```suggestion
        Static/invariant battery information is sent in BATTERY_INFO.
```

        Note that smart batteries should set the MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL bit to indicate that supplied capacity values are relative to a battery that is known to be full.
        Power monitors would not set this bit, indicating that capacity_consumed is relative to drone power-on, and that other values are estimated based on the assumption that the battery was full on power-on.
      </description>

>       <field type="uint8_t" name="id" instance="true">Battery ID</field>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      <field type="uint16_t" name="id" instance="true">Battery ID</field>
```
Is there a need to support more than 255 batteries? @AlexKlimaj thoughts? Would you ever go bigger than 255 in your box?

Author: I hope not. That feels like excessive future proofing.

Reviewer: I mean .. maybe ... is it? What if someone wanted to replace autopilot with ardupilot? :raised_eyebrow: 
https://www.google.com/search?q=how+many+batteries+in+a+tesla

see what I did there I rhymed

Author: @dakejahl And you wonder why nobody likes you :-)

Reviewer: haha ouch but you're wrong I am beloved. But no in DroneCAN I think it can make sense, probably not mavlink

Author: Yeah yeah :-). I'm going to say no "right now". Yes this might come back and bite us, but it feels like a waste.

      <field type="uint32_t" name="voltage" units="mV" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Battery voltage (total). UINT32_MAX: field not provided.</field>

>       <field type="uint32_t" name="current" units="mA" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Battery current (through all cells/loads). UINT32_MAX: field not provided.</field>

Reviewer 3: On the uint32 vs int32 we need to ensure GCS then are checking the charging flag on the transition to the new message. And autopilots are setting it where required right? 

For example negative current shows up on mission planner when charging using ArduPilot. (I'm quite sure but I'll try to check this week).

May I ask the reason to not just use int32 where negative is presumed to be towards (charging) the battery?

Author: I just figured that if we had the flag we could use it for this. But an int32 would be absolutely fine - in particular if it makes things easier for consumers.

@dakejahl I will update, and assume you will too.

      <field type="uint32_t" name="capacity_consumed" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Consumed charge. UINT32_MAX: field not provided. This is either the consumption since power-on or since the battery was full, depending on the value of MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL.</field>
      <field type="uint32_t" name="capacity_remaining" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Remaining charge (until empty). UINT32_MAX: field not provided. Note: If MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL is unset, this value is based on the assumption the battery was full when the system was powered.</field>

>       <field type="uint8_t" name="percent_remaining" units="%" invalid="UINT8_MAX">Remaining battery energy. Values: [0-100], UINT32_MAX: field not provided.</field>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      <field type="uint8_t" name="percent_remaining" units="%" invalid="UINT8_MAX">Remaining battery energy. Values: [0-100], UINT8_MAX: field not provided.</field>
```

>       <field type="uint32_t" name="voltage" units="mV" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Battery voltage (total). UINT32_MAX: field not provided.</field>
>       <field type="int32_t" name="current" units="mA" invalid="INT32_MAX">Battery current (through all cells/loads). Positive value when discharging and negative if charging. INT32_MAX: field not provided.</field>
>       <field type="uint32_t" name="capacity_consumed" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Consumed charge. UINT32_MAX: field not provided. This is either the consumption since power-on or since the battery was full, depending on the value of MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL.</field>
>       <field type="uint32_t" name="capacity_remaining" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Remaining charge (until empty). UINT32_MAX: field not provided. Note: If MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL is unset, this value is based on the assumption the battery was full when the system was powered.</field>

Author: Proposal from @tridge for the `BATTERY_STATUS_V2` to change voltage and current fields to use a `float` rather than `uint32_t` and `int32_t`.

```suggestion
      <field type="float" name="voltage" units="V" invalid="NaN">Battery voltage (total). NaN: field not provided.</field>
      <field type="float" name="current" units="A" invalid="NaN">Battery current (through all cells/loads). Positive value when discharging and negative if charging. NaN: field not provided.</field>
      <field type="float" name="capacity_consumed" units="Ah" invalid="NaN">Consumed charge. NaN: field not provided. This is either the consumption since power-on or since the battery was full, depending on the value of MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL.</field>
      <field type="float" name="capacity_remaining" units="Ah" invalid="NaN">Remaining charge (until empty). UINT32_MAX: field not provided. Note: If MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL is unset, this value is based on the assumption the battery was full when the system was powered.</field>
```

To quote (approximately):

> We should use float instead of uint32 milliXXXX. Same size, much more flexible, allows for NaN. Internally flight controllers use float or double, GCS uses double. Going via uint32 just doesn't make sense except in some special cases. uint16 can be worth it for some things as smaller. I wish we'd had float16 from the beginning in mavlink.
> Converting float <-> int is very expensive on current MCUs

@dakejahl This makes sense to me. Originally `current` was copied from battery status where it was half the size. I simply doubled the size without thinking, and that then got extended for the capacity fields. You OK with it?

Reviewer: makes sense to me, I didn't know :+1:

Author: OK, merging this.

      <field type="uint32_t" name="status_flags" display="bitmask" enum="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS">Fault, health, readiness, and other status indications.</field>
    </message>
```

`MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS` is a new enum that includes faults, charge state, and battery mode:

```xml
    <enum name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS" bitmask="true">
      <description>Battery status flags for fault, health and state indication.</description>

>       <entry value="1" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_READY_TO_USE">

Author: @dakejahl I might be overthinking this, but should this perhaps be "not ready to use" ? i.e it we're constructing it from all the other faults so we're not saying it is ready to use, but that it is "not unready to use". 

As it is now, you'd have to set the bit even if you didn't know the readiness, and by setting it you're saying its good to go. Whereas if we reverse it we're just saying - some flag that indicates there is a problem is set.

Anyway, not certain on this. I like a readiness flag too - just not sure we can be ready = not unready

Author: @hendjoshsr71 First, thanks for the review. Looks like a lot more issues than I first thought

This is supposed to reflect "there are no known issues that would prevent this flying" so how about MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_NOT_READY_TO_USE ? 

The actual issues that set this would depend on the person setting up the system. If it is OK to charge in place, then this would not be a fault that set this.

Reviewer: >@dakejahl I might be overthinking this

I think you might :laughing: 

Hmmm I'm not sure... You are saying you want it to be "not ready to use" since this would then correlate with a flag that gives us the reason for it being not ready? I would say you would infer this in the same way as seeing "ready to use" be set to zero. The other part is that an empty message (all zeroes) would be default to "not ready" which is a nice side effect.

Or maybe I don't see the point.

>There is a question for you and @dakejahl on inverting the "ready to use flag" to "unready to use". The former is what users want, but the later is what we can realistically and reliably provide.

I don't understand how we can know it's "not ready" but can't know it's "ready"? They're the same thing just inverse.

Author: @dakejahl What we do is check a bunch of things which mean it is **not ready** to use. So what we are saying is there are no flags that indicate it is not ready to use. Then we're inverting that and saying, "if there are no flags that say it is not ready to use it is ready to use."

Are they semantically the same? Technically they are not, because we only detect "known issues". It could be that there is an unknown issue we do not know about - so we're telling people it is ready to use when it is not. A legal expert would care, but perhaps we do not need to. 

> The other part is that an empty message (all zeroes) would be default to "not ready" which is a nice side effect.

It means that if you don't have the ability to report or detect faults you have to set this as ready all the time.

That's kind of my point - you're not actually saying its ready, you're just saying you don't know of any faults.

Reviewer: Ahh so you're saying "the system is not not ready" does not mean the same thing as "the system is ready"...? Essentially saying we could just not know the state. I honestly don't have a strong opinion on it, I think semantically you are correct but I sure do hate double negatives lol. So yeah we can change it to "not ready" and then the check would be if it's unset, easy enough. I'll leave that up to you.

        <description>
          The battery is ready to use (fly).

>           Only set if the battery is safe and ready to fly with (not charging, no critical faults, such as those that would set MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_REQUIRES_SERVICE or MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_BAD_BATTERY, etc.).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
          Only set if the battery is safe and ready to fly with (no critical faults, such as those that would set MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_REQUIRES_SERVICE or MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_BAD_BATTERY, etc.).
```

Unless the not charging bit  is just a suggestion this isn't true for onboard energy generators?

Author: Fair enough! See https://github.com/mavlink/rfcs/pull/19/files#r887604845 . This would depend on the system. I will remove charging.

```suggestion
          Set if the battery has no known issues that would make it unsafe to fly with. This includes critical faults, such as those that would set MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_REQUIRES_SERVICE or MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_BAD_BATTERY).
```

        </description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="2" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CHARGING">
        <description>
          Battery is charging.

>           Not ready to use (MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_READY_TO_USE would not be set).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
          Not ready to use (MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_READY_TO_USE would not be set).
```

Ditto disagree..  Just need different wording maybe?

Author: Fair enough. We should just delete.

>           Not ready to use (MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_READY_TO_USE would not be set).

Author: ```suggestion
```

      </entry>
      <entry value="8" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_CELL_IMBALANCE">
        <description>
          Battery cells are not balanced.
          Not ready to use.
        </description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="16" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_AUTO_DISCHARGING">
        <description>
          Battery is auto discharging (towards storage level).
          Not ready to use (MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_READY_TO_USE would not be set).
        </description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="32" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_REQUIRES_SERVICE">
        <description>
          Battery requires service (not safe to fly). 
          This is set at vendor discretion.
          It is likely to be set for most faults, and may also be set according to a maintenance schedule (such as age, or number of recharge cycles, etc.).
        </description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="64" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_BAD_BATTERY">
        <description>
          Battery is faulty and cannot be repaired (not safe to fly). 
          This is set at vendor discretion.
          The battery should be disposed of safely.
        </description>
      </entry>

>       <entry value="128" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_PROTECTIONS_ENABLED">

Reviewer 3: How would you say if only some of the Protection functions are enabled?

AKA voltages and temperature protections enabled only.

Disabling the current protections while listening for the warnings can be a bit more conservative of a system. As cutting off current could have severe consequences.

Author: A question for @dakejahl - my assumption here was that all protections are enabled or disabled. When enabled, if you get a fault you're monitoring for then `MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_PROTECTION_SYSTEM` is fired and the FETs turn off the battery. YOu might get the cause of the fault in another fault. If it is not enabled you don't get MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_PROTECTION_SYSTEM but you might get other faults.

Upshot MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_PROTECTION_SYSTEM  is what tells you that you have lost all power due to fault protection, and MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_PROTECTIONS_ENABLED is more of a status bit.

So the real question is whether you care that particular protections are enabled, or just that any are.

Reviewer: >Disabling the current protections while listening for the warnings can be a bit more conservative of a system. As cutting off current could have severe consequences.

>A question for @dakejahl - my assumption here was that all protections are enabled or disabled

In my implementation I am defining "protections disabled" as being the FET control protections that would disable the output FETs. I leave the input FET protections enabled all the time. 

>So the real question is whether you care that particular protections are enabled, or just that any are.

You might, but this might be too much detail and could be implementation dependent. I'm not sure though.

Author: @hendjoshsr71 @dakejahl I just read the DS-13 pixhawk standard for smart batteries and from that I infer that the reason we have that MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_PROTECTIONS_ENABLED is to know when we're in "airmode" or not - i.e. its a signal that if you fly and this is set you're potentially stuffed. 

So we don't care which protections are enabled, just that any might be. If you agree, the update would be a note "some protections are enabled"

Reviewer: @schwacff

Author: My thought is that airmode is a really poor name - that's at least the third overload of the term I've seen just in Pixhawk/PX4. 

This is a case where the spec should be updated.

Reviewer: >My thought is that airmode is a really poor name

I agree I think the name could be better. Also since this Mavlink message is supposed to be generic I'd rather leave it as PROTECTIONS_ENABLED since some implementations may or may not share the concept of an "airmode"

Author: Yep. I really do think the standard should change here. From my read it isn't even airmode so much as "not in the air mode". Either way, as you say, MAVLink designs should be around generic concepts

Reviewer 3: Airmode is a bit specific to PX4 possibly? Assuming you mean the flight mode but I'm not sure if you do or not :)

I'm fine PROTECTIONS_ENABLED if you document what it means and that it means output protections enabled due to any cause ie current, voltage, temperature, power deviations out of spec.

Reviewer 4: The idea is that output protections are enabled when the vehicle is powered but not in use or in the air. Once the vehicle is armed, or starts moving, you disable the protections to prevent false positives from disabling the output.

Reviewer 5: Hey guys, the way we intend it is that "airmode" (which I agree we should change the mode to "flight mode" or something) is to be the mode that the battery enters before takeoff stays in during flight. This is intended to bypass all possible protections that could cause failure in flight, including things like both charge and discharge cutoff. Charge cutoff should also be deactivated, because if it trips you end up discharging through the body diode of the charge FET, making it super hot and potentially failing. All of these faults however should remain active as warnings so that they notify the user in flight, post flight, and are logged.

Reviewer 6: We're really talking about an armed/disarmed state for the battery. Exactly what that is should be implementation specific. Acknowledging the arguments put forward, I'm a bit hesitant here. Warnings aren't really sufficient: I think we need to be clearer that these errors should trigger failsafe actions, but that whilst armed the failsafe action will be controlled by the autopilot not the battery.

Reviewer 5: I agree - the choice of what to do about these should be up to the application / aircraft

Author: @auturgy The semantics of "armed" are different enough I think that using this terminology is risky. Unlike with autopilot armed (in which power is not supplied), the battery will normally still supply power unless there is a fault. Further the protection system might still detect a fault but not trigger the failsafe.

But I do very much like the idea that this is a mode where all faults should be ignored by the autopilot while in the air _if we can make that assumption_ - @schwacff ?

In that case we might need a better name than armed or protection. Perhaps MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_BATTERY_CONTROLS_FAILSAFE ?

Author: > Airmode is a bit specific to PX4 possibly? Assuming you mean the flight mode but I'm not sure if you do or not :)

@hendjoshsr71 Yes, airmode in this case means "safe to fly because the protection system is not enabled". Not the PX4 [airmode](http://docs.px4.io/master/en/config_mc/pid_tuning_guide_multicopter.html#airmode-mixer-saturation). I'm OK with protections as a generic term, but we might be heading to even better semantics with ^^^.

Reviewer 5: I'm not sold on the "failsafe" term. That is used more to indicate the opposite of what we need, which is in case of failure, keep running. I like "Flight Mode"!

Author: @schwacff Well, that's the inversion. Either way I hate "flight mode" with real passion because its a well defined term with a _different_ meaning. Ditto airmode

Maybe someone else can come up with a better option.

Reviewer 3: > The idea is that output protections are enabled when the vehicle is powered but not in use or in the air. Once the vehicle is armed, or starts moving, you disable the protections to prevent false positives from disabling the output.

Thanks Alex! This explains what I hoped you meant by it. Add in some of the additional details from the Cory and  anew name and it should make sense to a knowledgeable reader.

Author: @hendjoshsr71 OK, I have added a note for the flag capturing the above comment: https://github.com/mavlink/rfcs/pull/19/files#r976062357

I haven't changed the name because I don't think we have a better one yet.

Reviewer 3: Yeah you are right on the name.   I couldn't determine a better one so I Iet it be the last time i looked through this PR.

 I like the additional wording for disabling protections when armed.

      <entry value="16384" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_SHORT_CIRCUIT">
        <description>
          Short circuit event detected.
          The battery may or may not be safe to use (check other flags).
        </description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="32768" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_VOLTAGE">
        <description>Voltage not compatible with power rail voltage (batteries on same power rail should have similar voltage).</description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="65536" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_FIRMWARE">
        <description>Battery firmware is not compatible with current autopilot firmware.</description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="131072" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_CELLS_CONFIGURATION">
        <description>Battery is not compatible due to cell configuration (e.g. 5s1p when vehicle requires 6s).</description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="262144" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL">
        <description>
          Battery capacity_consumed and capacity_remaining values are relative to a full battery (they sum to the total capacity of the battery).

>           This flag would be set for a smart battery that can accurately determine its remaining charge across vehicle reboots and discharge/recharge cycles.

Author: ```suggestion
          This flag would be set for a battery that can accurately determine its remaining charge across vehicle reboots and discharge/recharge cycles.
```

          If unset the capacity_consumed indicates the consumption since vehicle power-on, as measured using a power monitor. The capacity_remaining, if provided, indicates the estimated remaining capacity on the assumption that the battery was full on vehicle boot.

>           If unset a GCS is recommended to advise that users fully charge the battery on power on.

Reviewer 3: AP has this command `MAV_CMD_BATTERY_RESET ` to indicate less than 100% charge on boot up. Very useful with fuel systems. 

https://mavlink.io/en/messages/ardupilotmega.html#MAV_CMD_BATTERY_RESET

```suggestion
          If unset a GCS is recommended to advise that users fully charge the battery on power on. Or indicate the level of charge of the via another manner.
```

Author: MAV_CMD_BATTERY_RESET conceptually sounds like a very good idea. Smart battery users won't care, but potentially very handy for the power monitor case. Not sure I like the bitmask approach though.

Reviewer 3: It is most handy for those using petrol engines. As it is common to only fill them part way. 

On the bitmask I think it just allows you to reset multiple batteries at once.

Author: Thanks. I understand the bitmask. It's fine provided you only have 8 batteries - so my concern was "not scalable". Probably fine for the vast majority of systems for now.

I'm a little concerned about a message for battery resetting where the main use case is petrol engines :-).

I'll attempt a PR into common and see if there is interest in PX4 in taking it, and/or possible modifications.

Reviewer 3: > Thanks. I understand the bitmask. It's fine provided you only have 8 batteries - so my concern was "not scalable". Probably fine for the vast majority of systems for now.
> 
> I'm a little concerned about a message for battery resetting where the main use case is petrol engines :-).
> 
> I'll attempt a PR into common and see if there is interest in PX4 in taking it, and/or possible modifications.

I'm not sure if the main purpose is for petrol engines just the one fresh on my mind among those I'm assisting. 

I agree the bitmask approach is limiting.

Any ways I think this is this nearly there so I'm going to try to bring this up in tonight's devcall so we can get feedback from the AP side besides me :)

Reviewer: Thanks! Appreciate it!

        </description>
      </entry>

>       <entry value="4,294,967,295" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_EXTENDED">

Author: Fix invalid mavlink value format
```suggestion
      <entry value="4294967295" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_EXTENDED">
```

- removes the cell voltage arrays: `voltages` and `voltages_ext`
- adds `voltage`, the total cell voltage. This is a uint32_t to allow batteries with more than 65V.
- `current_consumed` has changed to capacity_consumed, and from an `int32_t` to a `uint32_t`.
  This future proofs from 32767 mAh limit to 4294967295 mAh 
- removes `energy_consumed`, which essentially duplicates `capacity_consumed` for most purposes, and `capacity_consumed` in mAh is nearly ubiquitous.
- adds `capacity_remaining`(mAh).
  - This allows a GCS to more accurately determine available current and remaining time than inferring from the `capacity_consumed` and `percent_remaining`.
  - This will be reliable for smart batteries.
  - A flag has been added to indicate whether this is calculated from an assumed or known-full battery.
    A GCS can use this to prompt that batteries be fully charged for power modules.
- Note that with capacity consumed and remaining, you have the full capacity and you could calculate the percentage remaining.
  However percentage remaining is supplied anyway, as the other values are optional, and this is actually the one value that most users really want.

> - change `current` from a `int16_t` (cA) to a `uint32_t` (mA). Maximum size was previously 327.67A, which is not large enough to be future proof. The value is absolute - if you're charging the value can be assumed to be in a reversed direction.

Reviewer 3: This may require some gcs changes to check the charging flag vs. just using int32 and not "needing" to do that though you should ?

Author: As above, yes, let's fix this to an int32. Plenty big enough.

Author: ```suggestion
- change `current` from a `int16_t` (cA) to a `int32_t` (mA). Maximum size was previously 327.67A, which is not large enough to be future proof. New value gives up to 2,147,483A. The value is positive when discharging, and negative when charging.
```

Reviewer 3: great!

> - adds `voltage`, the total cell voltage. This is a uint32_t to allow batteries with more than 65V.
> - `current_consumed` has changed to capacity_consumed, and from an `int32_t` to a `uint32_t`.
>   This future proofs from 32767 mAh limit to 4294967295 mAh 
> - removes `energy_consumed`, which essentially duplicates `capacity_consumed` for most purposes, and `capacity_consumed` in mAh is nearly ubiquitous.
> - adds `capacity_remaining`(mAh).
>   - This allows a GCS to more accurately determine available current and remaining time than inferring from the `capacity_consumed` and `percent_remaining`.
>   - This will be reliable for smart batteries.
>   - A flag has been added to indicate whether this is calculated from an assumed or known-full battery.
>     A GCS can use this to prompt that batteries be fully charged for power modules.
> - Note that with capacity consumed and remaining, you have the full capacity and you could calculate the percentage remaining.
>   However percentage remaining is supplied anyway, as the other values are optional, and this is actually the one value that most users really want.
> - change `current` from a `int16_t` (cA) to a `int32_t` (mA). Maximum size was previously 327.67A, which is not large enough to be future proof. New value gives up to 2,147,483A. The value is positive when discharging, and negative when charging.

Author: ```suggestion
- adds `voltage`, the total cell voltage. This is a float to allow batteries with more than 65V and also very small voltage changes.
- `current_consumed` has changed to capacity_consumed, and from an `int32_t` to a `float` in A.
  This future proofs from 32767 mAh limit and allows very large and very small values.
- removes `energy_consumed`, which essentially duplicates `capacity_consumed` for most purposes, and `capacity_consumed` in mAh is nearly ubiquitous.
- adds `capacity_remaining`(Ah) as a `float`.
  - This allows a GCS to more accurately determine available current and remaining time than inferring from the `capacity_consumed` and `percent_remaining`.
  - This will be reliable for smart batteries.
  - A flag has been added to indicate whether this is calculated from an assumed or known-full battery.
    A GCS can use this to prompt that batteries be fully charged for power modules.
- Note that with capacity consumed and remaining, you have the full capacity and you could calculate the percentage remaining.
  However percentage remaining is supplied anyway, as the other values are optional, and this is actually the one value that most users really want.
- change `current` from a `int16_t` (cA) to a `float` (A). Maximum size was previously 327.67A, which is not large enough to be future proof. New value gives full range and both very small and very high values.
```

- removes `time_remaining`.
  ```xml
  <field type="uint32_t" name="time_remaining" units="s" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Remaining battery time (estimated), UINT32_MAX: Remaining battery time estimate not provided.</field>
  ```
  - This is an estimated "convenience" value which can be calculated as well or better by a GCS, in particular on multi-battery systems (from original charge, `capacity_consumed` and looking at the rate of `current` over some time period).
  - Better to be lightweight.
- `percent_remaining` changed from int8 to uint8 (and max value set to invalid value).
  This is consistent with other MAVLink percentage fields.

> - removes `battery_function` and `type` (chemistry) as these are present in `SMART_BATTERY_INFO` and invariant.

Author: ```suggestion
- removes `battery_function` and `type` (chemistry) as these are present in `BATTERY_INFO` and are invariant.
```

  ```xml
     <field type="uint8_t" name="battery_function" enum="MAV_BATTERY_FUNCTION">Function of the battery</field>
     <field type="uint8_t" name="type" enum="MAV_BATTERY_TYPE">Type (chemistry) of the battery</field>
  ```

>   - A GCS that needs invariant information should read `SMART_BATTERY_INFO` on startup
>   - A vehicle that allows battery swapping must stream `SMART_BATTERY_INFO` (at low rate) to ensure that battery changes are notifie (and ideally also emit it on battery change).

Author: ```suggestion
  - A GCS that needs invariant information should read `BATTERY_INFO` on startup
  - A vehicle that allows battery swapping must stream `BATTERY_INFO` (at low rate) to ensure that battery changes are notifie (and ideally also emit it on battery change).
```

  - The mode and fault are reasonable, but make more sense as general status indication.
  - The status loses some faults which make no sense (e.g. `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT_SPIKES`) or which can now be inferred (like deep discharge).

#### Questions

- Do we need all the other fields?
- Are there any other fields missing?
- Should we have `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT` for critical level "just before deep discharge"? The battery can know this, and it might prevent over discharge.
  ```xml
      <entry value="1024" name="BATTERY_FAULT_CRITICAL_LEVEL">
        <description>Battery is at critically low level. Undamaged, but not ready to use.</description>
      </entry>
  ```
- `MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS`
  - Should this include `MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_IN_USE` (connected, drawing significant power to fly). Not clear when you would need this or how you would use it. Or precisely what would count as "in use".

## Battery Cell Voltages

The proposed battery message is:

```xml
    <message id="371" name="BATTERY_CELL_VOLTAGES">
      <description>Battery cell voltages.
        This message is provided primarily for cell fault debugging.

>         For batteries with more than 12 cells the message should be sent multiple times, iterating the index value.

Author: ```suggestion
        For batteries with more than 126 cells the message should be sent multiple times, iterating the index value.
```

        It should be streamed at very low rate (less than once a minute) or streamed only on request.</description>
      <field type="uint16_t" name="id" instance="true">Battery ID</field>
      <field type="uint16_t" name="index">Cell index (0 by default). This can be iterated for batteries with more than 12 cells.</field>

>       <field type="uint16_t[126]" name="voltages" units="mV" invalid="[0]">Battery voltage of up to 126 cells at current index. Cells above the valid cell count for this battery should be set to 0.</field>

Reviewer 7: was this supposed to be [12] not [126] ?
we also need a count to be able to tell how many are valid, and count need to be uint16_t to get the right packing and zero truncation

Reviewer 7: i'd prefer to match the proposed DrroneCAN one, and make length 24, with index of the first cell filled

Author: @tridge 

This is supposed to be 126. Thought was to reduce overheads of sending multiple messages and the hassle of re-assembling them until you get to 126 cells.

The array will be ordered last and any unused cells are zero-filled, so this will truncate on the number of cells used. No  count needed". If we set this to 24 cells the only difference is that for more than 24 cells you'll have to reconstruct the full cell list earlier. What's the value in that other than being able to extend the message later? 

Note - other than the length the UAVCAN message looks the same: https://github.com/dronecan/DSDL/pull/7/files

Reviewer 3: I think the purpose was that by mirroring both messages as close as possible there would be fewer implementation details?

Author: Fair enough. I'd like confirmation though, because that's not what it sounds like. I'm fairly confident of my understanding of MAVLink, but then this is Tridge, who is very rarely wrong.

Reviewer 7: if its supposed to be 12 then why does it say "This can be iterated for batteries with more than 12 cells"

Author: @tridge tridge Thanks, that's a typo. Fixed to 126.

But you also said 
- we also need a count to be able to tell how many are valid, and count need to be uint16_t to get the right packing and zero truncation
- i'd prefer to match the proposed DrroneCAN one, and make length 24, with index of the first cell filled

So I thought there might be an actual problem with the design of the message being 126. I can force this to 24 to match DroneCan if you feel strongly that is somehow better. The symmetry appeals, it's just I can't see a justification for it technically.

Author: I consider the is message "on hold" (though non blocking on the rest of it). From @tridge:

> Needed:
> - a way to cope with high voltage batteries for total voltage 
> - a way to know if a cell is failing
>
> we can get that with float total_voltage and with highest/lowest cell voltage
> vastly easier to sound an alarm on GCS too we'd just have a percentage deviation threshold

I've requested a PR to this message.

Reviewer 7: see my proposal for a max/min cell voltage, much saner

Author: https://github.com/mavlink/rfcs/pull/19#issuecomment-1275544121

As designed, the message will not be zero-byte truncated (field re-ordering means that the array is last).
The message might be modified to make:
- `voltages` an extension field. For a 4S battery this would save 12 bytes per message but lose checking. If we do this we might as well mandate "no extension".
- `id` and `index` into `uint16_t`. For a 4S battery this would save 10 bytes per message,and retain mavlink checking on field. It would cost 2 additional bytes on every new message.

#### Alternatives

An alternative is just to send fault information.
This assumes that the smart battery is capable of providing the long term trend analysis that can be obtained from logs using the above message.

```xml
    <message id="???" name="BATTERY_CELL_VOLTAGES">
      <description>Battery cell fault information.</description>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="id" instance="true">Battery ID</field>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="index">Cell index (0 by default). This is iterated for every 64 cells, allowing very large cell fault information. </field>
      <field type="uint64_t" name="fault_mask">Fault/health indications.</field>
    </message>
```

> ## SMART_BATTERY_INFO
> 
> [SMART_BATTERY_INFO](https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html#SMART_BATTERY_INFO) is already deployed and it is not clear if it can be modified. It may be possible to extend.
> 
> Add note that it must be streamed at a low rate in order to allow detection of battery change, and should also be sent when the battery changes. 
> 
> Questions:
> - What low rate is OK for streaming? is there another alternative for tracking battery change
>  

Author: ```suggestion
## BATTERY_INFO

[BATTERY_INFO](https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html#BATTERY_INFO) is WIP in common. This has been renamed from `SMART_BATTERY_INFO` as there were no known implementations.

Add note that it must be streamed at a low rate in order to allow detection of battery change, and should also be sent when the battery changes. 
 
```

        This should be streamed (nominally at 1Hz).
        Static/invariant battery information is sent in SMART_BATTERY_INFO.
        Note that smart batteries should set the MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL bit to indicate that supplied capacity values are relative to a battery that is known to be full.
        Power monitors would not set this bit, indicating that capacity_consumed is relative to drone power-on, and that other values are estimated based on the assumption that the battery was full on power-on.
      </description>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="id" instance="true">Battery ID</field>
      <field type="int16_t" name="temperature" units="cdegC" invalid="INT16_MAX">Temperature of the whole battery pack (not internal electronics). INT16_MAX field not provided.</field>
      <field type="uint32_t" name="voltage" units="mV" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Battery voltage (total). UINT32_MAX: field not provided.</field>
      <field type="int32_t" name="current" units="mA" invalid="INT32_MAX">Battery current (through all cells/loads). Positive value when discharging and negative if charging. INT32_MAX: field not provided.</field>

>       <field type="uint32_t" name="capacity_consumed" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Consumed charge. UINT32_MAX: field not provided. This is either the consumption since power-on or since the battery was full, depending on the value of MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL.</field>

Reviewer 3: Just working on some code that needs to use these definitions. So glad to see consumed vs remaining being separated vs in the past.  I'd like to make clearer the distinction though?

```suggestion
      <field type="uint32_t" name="capacity_consumed" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Consumed charge. UINT32_MAX: field not provided. This is either the consumption since power-on or since the battery was full, depending on the value of MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL. This value is monotonically increasing. Example this battery index is recharged in-flight or swapped with a full battery after landing. </field>
```

Author: @hendjoshsr71
1. The value depends on the flag MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL. For a smart battery you set MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL and the values capacity_consumed + capacity remaining = full battery. If that flag is not set then the consumed would be monotonically increasing - it is literal consumption.

Does that make sense?

2. Is it time for me to push the definitions into development? I think we're stabilizing re DroneCAN too right ?@dakejahl @hendjoshsr71 One more review of "the lot" would be appreciated.

Reviewer: >If that flag is not set then the consumed would be monotonically increasing - it is literal consumption.

Yes this is how I see it too

>One more review of "the lot" would be appreciated.

Took another look over and LGTM

Reviewer 3: I might add this part then to the description "For a smart battery you set MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL and the values capacity_consumed + capacity remaining = full battery. If that flag is not set then the consumed would be monotonically increasing"

I was thinking it might be the total consumption since power on which could be greater than the pack's actual capacity due to charging. Or due to refilling the fuel tank or recharging without a reboot.  (Reminds me separately it would be nice to one day for both PX4 and AP to not force other energy systems into the BATTERY_STATUS message. :)

2.) I'm good with moving forward with these so that we can take them to our respective teams. 

Probably, could have an additional comment on the meaning of `"MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_PROTECTIONS_ENABLED"`

Author: @hendjoshsr71  I don't think it would matter if the value could be recharged on the fly via the power monitor - in that case if you saw the consumed current go down you'd be fine. But you're right, battery hot-swaps are problematic. In the ideal case you'd power-cycle the power module on hot-swap. 

FMI how does the flight controller remain powered  on hot swap? Is there a backup battery on a separate power module? 

How about:

```suggestion
      <field type="uint32_t" name="capacity_consumed" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Consumed charge. UINT32_MAX: field not provided. If MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL is true this is the charge used since the battery was full. Otherwise it is the consumption since power-on (as measured using a power monitor). Note that if the flag is unset the value will not be useful (if you hot-swap a battery without power-cycling the power module).</field>
```

Let's finish these discussions before moving to the next stage. We're not far off.

Reviewer: >In the ideal case you'd power-cycle the power module on hot-swap.

I don't think that's necessary. If you're hot swapping batteries the whole point is to keep the system turned on (think cameras on a movie set that take a long time to turn on and set up). Power modules are connected directly to the main power system (powered by 2 batteries in parallel for example), so there is no ability to reset them. If you hotswap, just be prepared to see additional consumption (2x the capacity of a single battery if you drain 2 fully charged batteries). This sounds perfectly reasonable.

>FMI how does the flight controller remain powered on hot swap? Is there a backup battery on a separate power module?

Typically the batteries are in parallel

      <field type="uint32_t" name="capacity_remaining" units="mAh" invalid="UINT32_MAX">Remaining charge (until empty). UINT32_MAX: field not provided. Note: If MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL is unset, this value is based on the assumption the battery was full when the system was powered.</field>
      <field type="uint8_t" name="percent_remaining" units="%" invalid="UINT8_MAX">Remaining battery energy. Values: [0-100], UINT8_MAX: field not provided.</field>
      <field type="uint32_t" name="status_flags" display="bitmask" enum="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS">Fault, health, readiness, and other status indications.</field>
    </message>
```

`MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS` is a new enum that includes faults, charge state, and battery mode:

```xml
    <enum name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS" bitmask="true">
      <description>Battery status flags for fault, health and state indication.</description>
      <entry value="1" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_NOT_READY_TO_USE">
        <description>

>           The battery is not ready to use (fly).
>           Set if the battery has faults that would make it unsafe to fly with.
>           It aggregates other serious faults, like MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_REQUIRES_SERVICE, MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_BAD_BATTERY and others (at manufacturer/integrator discretion).

Author: ```suggestion
          The battery is not ready to use (fly).
          Set if the battery has faults or other conditions that make it unsafe to fly with.
          Note: It will be the logical OR of other status bits (chosen by the manufacturer/integrator).
```

        <description>
          Battery cells are not balanced.
          Not ready to use.
        </description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="16" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_AUTO_DISCHARGING">
        <description>
          Battery is auto discharging (towards storage level).
          Not ready to use (MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_NOT_READY_TO_USE would be set).
        </description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="32" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_REQUIRES_SERVICE">
        <description>
          Battery requires service (not safe to fly). 
          This is set at vendor discretion.
          It is likely to be set for most faults, and may also be set according to a maintenance schedule (such as age, or number of recharge cycles, etc.).
        </description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="64" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_BAD_BATTERY">
        <description>
          Battery is faulty and cannot be repaired (not safe to fly). 
          This is set at vendor discretion.
          The battery should be disposed of safely.
        </description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="128" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_PROTECTIONS_ENABLED">
        <description>

>           Automatic battery protection monitoring is enabled. 
>           When enabled, the system will monitor for certain kinds of faults, such as cells being over-voltage.
>           If a fault is triggered then and protections are enabled then a safety fault (MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_PROTECTION_SYSTEM) will be set and power from the battery will be stopped.
>           Note that the associated fault (such as MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_OVER_VOLT) should always be set whether or not the protection system is engaged.

Author: Add explanation of when this should be used. 
```suggestion
          Automatic battery protection monitoring is enabled.        
          When enabled, the system will monitor for certain kinds of faults, such as cells being over-voltage.
          If a fault is triggered then and protections are enabled then a safety fault (MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_PROTECTION_SYSTEM) will be set and power from the battery will be stopped.
          Note that battery protection monitoring should only be enabled when the vehicle is landed. Once the vehicle is armed, or starts moving, the protections should be disabled to prevent false positives from disabling the output.
```

>         </description>

Author: Several times people have said "can we separate faults and status flags into separate fields".

A reason to do this is if there is a clear semantic difference between the two that also makes it easier for handling and presentation if they are separate.
Only it is true, do we need to consider how much of a buffer we need for each type, and whether the cost is worth it.
Separating these is pointless if this is not true, and increases the risk that we will run out of bits in the current field "eventually".

The problem is that we do not have a clear definition of what is a "fault vs status", and how we would treat them differently.
If we can define that objectively we can then think about the costs.

The following are IMO definitily statuses.
They reflect modes of operation or information about how other flags are used.
They also aggegate faults and modes to provide a kind of super-test - like STATUS_NOT_READY_TO_USE"

STATUS_FLAGS - DEFINITE
- STATUS_CELL_CHARGING
- STATUS_CELL_BALANCING
- STATUS_NOT_READY_TO_USE
- STATUS_AUTO_DISCHARGING
- STATUS_NOT_READY_TO_USE - combines faults/statuss
- STATUS_PROTECTIONS_ENABLED
- STATUS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL  
- STATUS_REQUIRES_SERVICE (not faulty, but a hint to user)

The following are IMO definitely faults.
They indicate a _specific_ problem with the battery. You wouldn't take off with these, but you would hope to have them reported when flying and flight stack to take action of some kind (right?)

FAULTS - DEFINITE 
- FAULT_CELL_IMBALANCE
- FAULT_OVER_VOLT  
- FAULT_UNDER_VOLT
- FAULT_OVER_TEMPERATURE
- FAULT_UNDER_TEMPERATURE
- FAULT_FAULT_OVER_CURRENT
- FAULT_SHORT_CIRCUIT

Would you do anything special if you had the ones above in a separate field? i.e. if it isn't useful to separate these then we can stop the discussion.

UNDECIDED - These ones might fit in either.

- STATUS_BAD_BATTERY 
  - unusable battery that should be thrown away.
  - it's beyond the point of flying with or a particular fault being interesting.
  - If we have to split I think this is a status
  
The following aren't faults with the battery itself, but with choosing to use it on this vehicle.
They "feel" more like statuses to me, but it depends how we define fault.
- FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_VOLTAGE
- FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_FIRMWARE
- FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_CELLS_CONFIGURATION

- FAULT_PROTECTION_SYSTEM - fault protection system triggered and power turned off. 
  - Its report that you have no power being delivered.
  - There is nothing an autopilot can do about this really because it has no power.
  - I'm actually not sure why we'd send it since the recipient gets this an is now dead. Perhaps for multi battery systems?
  
Anyway, do we have a specific meaning for fault which makes it useful to separately handle, and can that meaning be applied objectively? @julianoes @AlexKlimaj @dakejahl @hendjoshsr71

Reviewer: >can that meaning be applied objectively? 

I think it can only be applied objectively in the context of TI ASICs or other ASICs that have a "fault subsystem." It definitely can't be applied objectively if we want to consider a broader range of "smart" batteries that may or may not have a BMS ASIC. 

I think having them all combined is fine, the only concern is running out of space if other flags need to be added, but hopefully we have done our job defining things well enough that we don't need to add more than an additional 13 flags :sweat_smile:

Author: @dakejahl Thanks

> I think it can only be applied objectively in the context of TI ASICs or other ASICs that have a "fault subsystem."...

I disagree - whether or not you support the TI ASICS the faults are objectively faults. They are just faults that some systems are unable to report. I don't see that as different than having a fault that just didn't occur.

> I think having them all combined is fine ...

Me too. If we don't get a different view then it is better to keep them all in one.

Reviewer 3: I think it is fine if they are combined. The ones listed covered most of the cases and we still have space to add more.

Author: OK. Agreed.

      <entry value="8192" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_OVER_CURRENT">
        <description>Over-current fault.</description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="16384" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_SHORT_CIRCUIT">
        <description>
          Short circuit event detected.
          The battery may or may not be safe to use (check other flags).
        </description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="32768" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_VOLTAGE">
        <description>Voltage not compatible with power rail voltage (batteries on same power rail should have similar voltage).</description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="65536" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_FIRMWARE">
        <description>Battery firmware is not compatible with current autopilot firmware.</description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="131072" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_FAULT_INCOMPATIBLE_CELLS_CONFIGURATION">
        <description>Battery is not compatible due to cell configuration (e.g. 5s1p when vehicle requires 6s).</description>
      </entry>
      <entry value="262144" name="MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_CAPACITY_RELATIVE_TO_FULL">
        <description>

>           Battery capacity values are relative to a known-full battery.
>           If set: the supplied capacity_consumed and capacity_remaining are relative to battery full.
>           If unset: capacity_consumed is relative to drone power-on, and capacity_remaining estimated from capacity_consumed and the assumption that the battery was full at power on.
>           This bit should be set by smart batteries and unset for power modules.
>           If unset a GCS is recommended to advise that users fully charge the battery on power on.

Author: ```suggestion
          Battery capacity_consumed and capacity_remaining values are relative to a full battery (they sum to the total capacity of the battery).
          This flag would be set for a smart battery that can accurately determine its remaining charge across vehicle reboots and discharge/recharge cycles.
          If unset the capacity_consumed indicates the consumption since vehicle power-on, as measured using a power monitor. The capacity_remaining, if provided, indicates the estimated remaining capacity on the assumption that the battery was full on vehicle boot.
          If unset a GCS is recommended to advise that users fully charge the battery on power on.
```

  - The mode and fault are reasonable, but make more sense as general status indication.
  - The status loses some faults which make no sense (e.g. `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT_SPIKES`) or which can now be inferred (like deep discharge).

#### Questions

- Do we need all the other fields?
- Are there any other fields missing?
- Should we have `MAV_BATTERY_FAULT` for critical level "just before deep discharge"? The battery can know this, and it might prevent over discharge.
  ```xml
      <entry value="1024" name="BATTERY_FAULT_CRITICAL_LEVEL">
        <description>Battery is at critically low level. Undamaged, but not ready to use.</description>
      </entry>
  ```
- `MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS`
  - Should this include `MAV_BATTERY_STATUS_FLAGS_IN_USE` (connected, drawing significant power to fly). Not clear when you would need this or how you would use it. Or precisely what would count as "in use".

## Battery Cell Voltages

The proposed battery message is:

```xml

>     <message id="371" name="BATTERY_CELL_VOLTAGES">
>       <description>Battery cell voltages.
>         This message is provided primarily for cell fault debugging.
>         For batteries with more than 12 cells the message should be sent multiple times, iterating the index value.
>         It should be streamed at very low rate (less than once a minute) or streamed only on request.</description>
>       <field type="uint8_t" name="id" instance="true">Battery ID</field>
>       <field type="uint8_t" name="index">Cell index (0 by default). This can be iterated for batteries with more than 12 cells.</field>
>       <field type="uint16_t[12]" name="voltages" units="mV" invalid="[0]">Battery voltage of 12 cells at current index. Cells above the valid cell count for this battery should be set to 0.</field>
>     </message>

Author: @julianoes @auturgy We make this a short fixed length of 12 cells, because we wanted to make sure that it would be smaller in the general case, and in particular if extended.

HOwever it occurs to me that
1. Given the name, we should never extend this message.
2. If we make 0 the default and extend to 126 bytes then just as efficient due to zero bye truncation for short messages. But MORE efficient for bigger than that because we don't add packet overheads for each index.
3. Much easier for consumers to use, up to 126 cells. 
4. Two bytes bigger for the most common case - up to 12 cells.
5. But this is only send for debugging, and realistically you're not using it for "control" but for long term trends. You could probably get a way with a ping every few minutes, or even hours.

So I'm suggesting we finalise the message prioritising easy of use. Thoughts?

```suggestion
    <message id="371" name="BATTERY_CELL_VOLTAGES">
      <description>Battery cell voltages.
        This message is provided primarily for cell fault debugging.
        For batteries with more than 12 cells the message should be sent multiple times, iterating the index value.
        It should be streamed at very low rate (less than once a minute) or streamed only on request.</description>
      <field type="uint16_t" name="id" instance="true">Battery ID</field>
      <field type="uint16_t" name="index">Cell index (0 by default). This can be iterated for batteries with more than 12 cells.</field>
      <field type="uint16_t[126]" name="voltages" units="mV" invalid="[0]">Battery voltage of up to 126 cells at current index. Cells above the valid cell count for this battery should be set to 0.</field>
    </message>
```

Author: Merging. We can discuss the detail later.

Author: @dakejahl FYI

Reviewer: LGTM

Reviewer 3: I think I'm adding wrong or not understanding something? 
126*2 (cells) + 2 (id) + 2 (instance) = 256 B > payload[max 255]
